Trauma Case Reports 7 (2017) 15–18

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Trauma Case Reports

j o ur n a l h o m e p a g e : w ww . e l s e v i e r . c om / l o c a t e / t c r

Case Report
Conservative treatment using an endoscopic pancreatic stent in a patient with
delayed diagnosis of pancreatic injury after blunt trauma: A case report
Se Hun Kim a, Ki Hoon Kim b,⁎

a Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, Inje University College of Medicine, Haeundae Paik Hospital, Busan, Republic of Korea
b Department of Surgery, Inje University College of Medicine, Haeundae Paik Hospital, Busan, Republic of Korea

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Accepted 2 January 2017
Available online 9 January 2017

Keywords:
Pancreatic injury
Endoscopic pancreatic stenting
Blunt abdominal trauma

Introduction

The diagnostic evaluation of pancreatic injuries has improved dramatically in recent years.
However, it is sometimes difﬁcult to diagnose pancreatic injuries. Surgical treatment after de-
layed diagnosis is associated with increased risks of mortality and morbidity. A 47-year-old
man was referred to our emergency department after experiencing blunt abdominal trauma
5 d earlier. The patient was diagnosed with a grade-III pancreatic injury. His hemodynamic sta-
tus remained stable. He was managed successfully using endoscopic pancreatic stenting and
percutaneous drainage catheter insertion.

© 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the
CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

The diagnostic evaluation of pancreatic injuries has improved dramatically in recent years [1]. However, it is sometimes difﬁ-
cult to diagnose pancreatic injuries due to the limited accuracy of diagnoses based on laboratory ﬁndings (serum amylase and li-
pase levels), diagnostic peritoneal lavage, ultrasound, and abdominal computed tomography (CT) [1,2]. Radiological imaging often
fails to identify pancreatic injuries in the acute phase [3]. Advanced inﬂammation and autodigestion can occur in sites surrounding
pancreatic injuries if diagnosis is delayed. Therefore, surgical treatment after delayed diagnosis is associated with increased risks
of mortality and morbidity [2,4]. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) is one of the most accurate ductal eval-
uation modalities, and endoscopic pancreatic stenting might allow unnecessary surgery to be avoided [1].

In this paper, we report a case of pancreatic injury that was diagnosed late after the initial trauma without injury to any other

intra-abdominal organs. The patient was managed successfully using endoscopic pancreatic stenting.

Case presentation

A 47-year-old man was referred to our emergency department after experiencing blunt abdominal trauma 5 d earlier. The
mechanism of injury was a blow to the epigastrium caused by a fall. His vital signs included a blood pressure of 120/
70 mmHg, heart rate of 72 beats per min, body temperature of 37.2 °C, and respiratory rate of 20 breaths per min. Laboratory
tests revealed a white blood cell count of 21,310/mm3, mild increases in serum amylase/lipase levels (471/688 U/L), and a C-re-
active protein level of 25.71 mg/dL. An abdominal CT scan revealed discontinuity between the pancreas head and neck with
peripancreatic ﬂuid collection (Fig. 1). The patient was diagnosed with a grade-III pancreatic injury. His hemodynamic status

⁎ Corresponding author: Department of Surgery, Inje University Haeundae Paik Hospital, 48108, Haeundae-ku, Busan, Republic of Korea.

E-mail address: medhun@hanmail.net (K.H. Kim).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tcr.2017.01.008
2352-6440/© 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

16

S.H. Kim, K.H. Kim / Trauma Case Reports 7 (2017) 15–18

Fig. 1. Abdominal computed tomography showing pancreatic neck transection (white arrow) and phlegmon formation.

remained stable over the 5 d following the fall. First, we performed ERCP, which demonstrated disruption of the main pancreatic
duct with leakage at the neck portion of the pancreas. A 5-Fr 9-cm endoscopic pancreatic stent was inserted into the pancreatic
duct across the disrupted portion (Fig. 2). Next, a percutaneous drainage catheter was placed at the site of peripancreatic ﬂuid
collection. A follow-up CT scan revealed no exacerbation of the pancreatic injury and decreased peripancreatic ﬂuid collection vol-
ume. The patient's symptoms improved after endoscopic treatment and percutaneous catheter insertion. The percutaneous cath-
eter was removed on hospital day 20, and the patient was discharged on hospital day 26. Four months after discharge, follow-up
ERCP was performed and revealed no leakage at the disruption site but stricture around the leakage site. The initial stent was re-
placed with a 7-Fr 9-cm endoscopic pancreatic stent to dilate the stricture site. ERCP was performed again at 7 months after dis-
charge, and revealed mild stricture of the leakage site without leakage. Therefore, the stent was removed. Another 4 months later,
the patient had experienced no further adverse events.

Fig. 2. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography showing leakage at the neck portion of the pancreas (black arrow) and an inserted pancreatic stent (white
arrow).

S.H. Kim, K.H. Kim / Trauma Case Reports 7 (2017) 15–18

17

Discussion

The pancreas is a relatively uncommon site of traumatic injury, and the incidence of pancreatic injury accounts for only 5% of
signiﬁcant blunt abdominal trauma [5,6]. This rarity is due to the anatomical location of the pancreas within the retroperitonium
[7]. The ﬁxed position of the pancreas (anterior to the vertebral column) provides excellent protection against deceleration inju-
ries and posterior stab wounds [8]. Blunt trauma to the pancreas is caused by a sudden localized force applied to the upper ab-
domen that compresses the pancreas against the vertebral column [9]. Disruption of the main or minor pancreatic ducts is
frequent in these situations. Patients with clinically signiﬁcant pancreatic injuries can experience pancreatic juice leakage into
the abdominal cavity due to disruption of the ducts [3]. The typical clinical triad of pancreatic trauma is upper abdominal pain,
leukocytosis, and elevated serum amylase level. However, this clinical triad may be absent during the ﬁrst or several days follow-
ing onset [3,10]. Pancreatic injury frequently results in delayed diagnosis, followed by signiﬁcant complications including
pseudocyst, ﬁstula, abscess formation, false aneurysm, and sepsis, ultimately leading to high rates of morbidity and mortality
[1–4].

The decision to use a conservative or surgical approach in cases of pancreatic injury depends on the integrity of the main pan-
creatic duct, extent of pancreatic parenchymal damage, anatomical location of the injury, stability of the patient, and degree of
associated organ damage [11]. Conservative management may be warranted in patients with an isolated pancreatic contusion
or superﬁcial lacerations without ductal disruption (Grade I or II). The treatment of traumatic pancreatitis consists of bowel
rest, nasogastric suction, and nutritional support [12]. Grades I and II are treated with non-operative techniques or simple drain-
age, whereas grade-III or higher injuries often require resection combined with possible reconstruction and/or drainage proce-
dures [13]. Due to the development of ERCP, conservative treatment is the preferred initial treatment option in cases of
pancreatic ductal injury in modern clinical practice. Among the available non-operative methods, ERCP and endoscopic pancreatic
stent placement are becoming the main methods of diagnosis and minimally invasive treatment, respectively, and may decrease
the need for operative therapy. Huckfeldt et al. reported the ﬁrst successful ERCP and stent placement. In this previous report,
ERCP was performed only a few hours after the initial pancreatic trauma [14]. Other studies have reported successful duct
stent placement for the treatment of traumatic duct disruption [15,16]. Rogers et al. reported that endoscopic treatment for ductal
injury was possible in 42% of patients, with or without the need for additional surgery [17]. Most previously published reports
describe early stenting, and there are limited reports regarding successful ERCP in cases involving delayed presentation [7]. In
the present case, pancreatic duct injury was detected 5 d after blunt trauma, and grade-III pancreatic injury was demonstrated
on a CT scan. Because the patient's vital signs were stable, endoscopic stenting was the ﬁrst treatment choice and was performed
safely with no need for additional surgery. Percutaneous drainage was performed to treat an abscess around the pancreatic rup-
ture site after endoscopic stenting.

Endoscopic stenting can improve outcomes in patients with high-grade pancreatic injury, but some complications can occur in
the long-term that require stent replacement. Ductal stricture is the most common complication, and can be caused by the trauma
itself or stent/side-branch occlusion [18]. This complication may necessitate several stent placements [19]. Other complications,
including occlusion, migration, duodenal erosion, and infection, have also been reported [16]. In the present case, mild stricture
occurred but only one stent replacement was required, and no other complications occurred.

Conclusion

Although we have accumulated only limited experience with this strategy, we believe that it is effective in the treatment of
patients who are diagnosed late but are hemodynamically stable if the patient's condition is managed carefully. This method
may reduce the need for unnecessary surgery.

Consent

Written informed consent was obtained from the patient and his wife for publication of this case report and accompanying

images.

Conﬂict of interest

The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

Funding

This research did not receive any speciﬁc grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-proﬁt sectors.

Authors' contributions

KKH has made substantial contributions to conception and design. KKH and KSH wrote the paper. KSH checked bibliographic

reference. KKH had primary responsibility for the content. Both authors read and approved the ﬁnal manuscript.

18

References

S.H. Kim, K.H. Kim / Trauma Case Reports 7 (2017) 15–18

[1] D.K. Bhasin, S.S. Rana, P. Rawal, Endoscopic retrograde pancreatography in pancreatic trauma: need to break the mental barrier, J. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 24 (5)

(2009) 720–728.

(2008) 1591–1602.

[2] L.S. Kao, E.M. Bulger, D.L. Parks, G.F. Byrd, G.J. Jurkovich, Predictors of morbidity after traumatic pancreatic injury, J. Trauma 55 (5) (2003) 898–905.
[3] U. Linsenmaier, S. Wirth, M. Reiser, M. Körner, Diagnosis and classification of pancreatic and duodenal injureis in emergency radiology, Radiographics 28 (6)

[4] R.L. Cirillo, L.G. Koniaris, Detecting blunt pancreatic injuries, J. Gastrointest. Surg. 6 (2002) 587–598.
[5] C.R.J. LinBC, J.F. Fang, Y.P. Hsu, Y.C. Kao, J.L. Kao, Management of blunt major pancreatic injury, J. Trauma 56 (2004) 774–778.
[6] A. Subramanian, C.J. Dente, D.V. Feliciano, The management of pancreatic trauma in the modern era, Surg. Clin. N. Am. 87 (2007) 1512–1532.
[7] A. Vezakis, V. Koutoulidis, G. Fragulidis, G. Polymeneas, A. Polydorou, Complete traumatic main pancreatic duct disruption treated endoscopically: a case report, J.

Med. Case Rep. 8 (2014) 173.

[8] U. Debi, R. Kaur, K.K. Prasad, S.K. Sinha, K. Singh, Pancreatic trauma:a concise review, World J. Gastroenterol. 19 (47) (2013) 9003–9011.
[9] S.K. Venkatesh, J.M. Wan, CT of blunt pancreatic trauma: a pictorial essay, Eur. J. Radiol. 67 (2008) 311–320.
[10] J.W. Meredith, D.D. Trunkey, CT scanning in acute abdominal injuries, Surg. Clin. North Am. 68 (1988) 255–268.
[11] J.C. Duchesne, R. Schmieg, S. Islam, J. Olivier, N. McSwain, Selective nonoperative management of low-grade blunt pancreatic injury: are we there yet? J. Trauma

65 (2008) 49–53.

(1996) 143–144.

[12] R.H. Wilson, R.J. Moorehead, Current management of trauma to the pancreas, Br. J. Surg. 78 (1991) 1196–1202.
[13] M. Fisher, K. Brasel, Evolving management of pancreatic injury, Curr. Opin. Crit. Care 17 (2011) 613–617.
[14] R. Huckfeldt, C. Agee, W.K. Nichols, J. Barthel, Nonoperative treatment of traumatic pancreatic duct disruption using an endoscopically placed stent, J. Trauma 41

[15] J.J. Telford, J.J. Farrell, J.R. Saltzman, S.J. Shields, S.J. Banks, P.A. Banks, et al., Pancreatic stent placement for duct disruption, Gastrointest. Endosc. 56 (1) (2002)

18–24.

[16] H.S. Kim, D.K. Lee, I.W. Kim, S.K. Baik, S.O. Kwon, J.W. Park, et al., The role of endoscopic retrograde pancreatography in the treatment of a pancreatic duct injury,

[17] S.J. Roger, J.P. Cello, W.P. Schecter, Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancratography in patients with pancreatic trauma, J. Trauma 68 (3) (2010) 538–544.
[18] V. Brasoveanu, I. Bălescu, C. Anghel, I. Barbu, M. Ionescu, N. BBacalbasa, A case report of pancreatic transection by blunt abdominal trauma, Chirurgia (Bucur) 109

Gastrointest. Endosc. 54 (2001) 49–55.

(1) (2014) 123–127.

[19] D.E. Coelho, J.C. Ardengh, M.T. Carbalo, E.R. de Lina-Filho, T.H. Baron, J.F. Coelho, Clinicopathologic characteristics and endoscopic treatment of post-traumatic

pancreatic pseudocysts, Pancreas 40 (3) (2011) 469–473.

