Trauma Case Reports 3 (2016) 12–17

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Trauma Case Reports

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e vi e r . c o m / l o c a t e / t c r

Case Report
Lateral plating of the temporal bone: Hemostatic technique for
complex transverse fractures of the petrous temporal bone
F.A. Zeiler ⁎, C.J. Kazina 1

Section of Neurosurgery, Dept. of Surgery, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Accepted 26 March 2016
Available online 22 April 2016

Keywords:
Temporal bone fracture
Plating
Petrous carotid

Background: Transverse petrous temporal bone fractures are commonly
associated with signiﬁcant intracranial trauma. Diastases of these frac-
tures can lead to issues with hemostasis in the setting of venous sinus
or petrous internal carotid artery (ICA) injuries.
Objective: To describe a rare case of a severe displaced transverse
petrous temporal bone fracture with impending intra-operative exsan-
guination, treated with fracture reduction and lateral plating in order
to achieve hemostasis.
Methods: We retrospectively reviewed the records of a patient admitted
to the neurosurgical department with a hyperacute epidural hematoma
(EDH) secondary to a transverse petrous temporal bone fracture with
venous sinus and petrous ICA injuries.
Results: A 22 year old male was admitted for a severe traumatic brain
injury leading to a left displaced transverse petrous temporal bone
fracture and a hyperacute EDH. Given the location of the fractures, injury
to the venous sinus (at the area of the transverse-sigmoid junction) and
petrous ICA was suspected.
Intra-operatively, signiﬁcant blood loss from both the venous sinus and
petrous ICA was encountered. Given the displaced temporal bone frac-
ture, packing of the areas was impaired.
We performed a manual reduction of the temporal fracture, followed by
lateral plating in order to achieve hemostasis from the petrous ICA and
aid with packing of the venous sinus injury.
Conclusions: Reduction and lateral plating of displaced transverse
petrous temporal bone fractures can aid signiﬁcantly with intra-

⁎ Corresponding author at: Section of Neurosurgery, University of Manitoba, GB-1 Health Sciences Center, 820 Sherbrook Street,

Winnipeg, Manitoba R3A1R9, Canada. Fax: +1 204 787 3851.

E-mail addresses: umzeiler@myumanitoba.ca (F.A. Zeiler), ckazina@exchange.hsc.mb.ca (C.J. Kazina).

1 Section of Neurosurgery, University of Manitoba, GB-1 Health Sciences Center, 820 Sherbrook Street, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada,

R3A1R9.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tcr.2016.03.009
2352-6440/© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

F.A. Zeiler, C.J. Kazina / Trauma Case Reports 3 (2016) 12–17

13

operative hemostasis in the extreme case of venous sinus and/or petrous
ICA injuries.

© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access
article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Introduction

Various patterns of skull base fractures are seen in the setting of severe traumatic brain injury (TBI) [1].

These fractures can lead to cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) leak, meningitis and cranial neuropathies.

Temporal bone fractures are typically secondary to high energy impact, and are classically classiﬁed
according to the direction of the fracture lines [2,3]: longitudinal, transverse, and mixed. Recently, a newer
classiﬁcation system of temporal bone fractures includes subcategories for petrous region fractures and the
degree of involvement of the otic capsule [3].

Fractures of the petrous temporal bone are concerning. The amount of energy required to fracture this
segment of the temporal bone is typically transmitted to the brain leading to a variety of intracranial injuries
[4]. Up to 78% of the patients have intracranial hematomas, with acute subdural hematomas (SDHs) being the
most common [5]. In addition, injuries to the venous sinuses and the petrous portion of the internal carotid
artery (ICA) have been described.

Given the incidence of extra-axial compressive lesions with petrous temporal fractures, surgical evacua-
tion may be necessary. If there are associated venous sinus or petrous ICA injuries, hemostasis is paramount
in order to prevent exsanguination. In the setting of a severe displaced fracture of the petrous temporal
bone, there can be signiﬁcant difﬁculties in packing the site of hemorrhage and controlling the bleeding
from the petrous ICA.

Within this case we describe a rare displaced petrous temporal bone fracture in the presence of a hyper-
acute epidural hematoma (EDH), related to a venous sinus and petrous ICA injuries. Intra-operatively, hemo-
stasis was achieved via fracture reduction and ﬁxation with lateral temporal bone plating.

Case presentation

A 22 year old male was presented to the emergency department after being found down on the road. The
time from injury to the arrival of ﬁrst responders was unknown. His Glasgow coma score (GCS) on scene was
noted to be 8; with localization of the left arm to central stimulus, incomprehensible vocal sounds, and failure
to open his eyes. We stabilized his vital signs, with no signs of hypotension or hypoxia. It was noted that he
had signiﬁcant external trauma to the face and left occiput, with scalp lacerations and arterial bleeding
from the left external auditory canal (EAC). He was transferred to the local trauma center for evaluation.

Upon arrival to the emergency department his GCS dropped over a period of 10 min to 4, with extensor
posturing of the left side. His left pupil also became ﬁxed and dilated at 8 mm. Mannitol 40 g intravenously
(IV) was administered. He was subsequently intubated and sent for computed tomography (CT) of the
brain. The non-contrast CT of the brain demonstrated a large left extra-axial hyperacute hematoma, consistent
with an EDH, with signiﬁcant midline shift and uncal herniation (Fig. 1). In addition, the CT scan displayed a
severely displaced transversely oriented fracture to the petrous temporal bone (Fig. 2A, B, and C), extending
into the carotid canal (Fig. 2D, arrow). Concerns of both injuries to the junction of the transverse-sigmoid
sinus and the petrous ICA were raised. Arterial blood continued to drain from the left EAC.

After completion of the CT brain, his examination deteriorated to become bilaterally ﬁxed and dilated. His
brainstem reﬂexes were completely absent at this point, and he was not triggering the ventilator. His pCO2
was reduced to 25 mm Hg and he was administered 60 g of mannitol, followed by 140 mL of 7.33% saline
on his way to the operating room. Given the speed of decline, we were unable to perform CT angiography
to conﬁrm suspected venous sinus or petrous ICA injuries.

Under general anesthesia, a large trauma musculocutaneous ﬂap was raised, starting from 1 cm anterior to
the tragus and continuing in a “question mark” shape to include the frontal/temporal/parietal regions of the
calvarium. This ﬂap was elevated anteriorly until the keyhole was identiﬁed. Similarly, the ﬂap was opened
inferiorly to expose the entire root of the zygoma.

14

F.A. Zeiler, C.J. Kazina / Trauma Case Reports 3 (2016) 12–17

Fig. 1. Pre-operative CT brain. CT = computed tomography. Panel A: Axial CT image at the level of mesencephalon displaying signiﬁcant
bilateral uncal herniation and cerebral edema. The arrow indicates hemorrhage and pneumocephaly near the junction of the left trans-
verse and sigmoid sinuses. Panel B: Axial CT image at the level of the lateral ventricles displaying the left calvarial fracture and hyperacute
epidural hematoma.

The temporalis muscle was dissected off from the fractured fragments of the calvarium. At this point a
large amount of venous hemorrhage was encountered near the ﬂoor of the middle fossa, which was packed
with gel foam. The fracture fragments over the lateral cortical surface were removed, and the high speed
drill was utilized to complete a large craniectomy, exposing all of the frontal, temporal and parietal lobes of
the left hemisphere. A subtemporal decompression was performed with rongeurs.

The EDH was evacuated, revealing a large dural laceration to the cortical surface, measuring 8 cm by 6 cm
overlying the peri-Rolandic area. Hemostasis of this cortical injury was obtained with bipolar electrocautery.
Ongoing brisk venous sinus bleeding was seen from the area of the temporal fracture extending into the
asterion. The injury was inaccessible for primary repair. Attempts at packing the area failed as the pressure
required for packing led to diastases of the transverse petrous fracture and subsequent arterial bleeding
from deep within the fracture line. This likely represented the bleeding from the petrous ICA. The lateral
portion of the entire temporal bone became free ﬂoating from the remainder of the skull base.

The overall blood loss at this point was approximately 4 L from both the venous sinus and petrous ICA in-
juries. Ongoing transfusion occurred throughout the case, without any episodes of hypotension or hypoxemia.
Given the difﬁculties with controlling the hemorrhage from these two inaccessible sites, it was elected to
perform a manual reduction of the petrous temporal bone fracture, followed by lateral plating, in order to aid
with packing of the sinus injury and tamponade of the suspected petrous ICA injury.

Medially directed pressure was applied at the level of the EAC with a gloved open palm, leading the reduc-
tion of the fracture diastases in the petrous temporal bone. We were able to completely reduce the fracture
fragments, which were initially separated approximately 10–15 mm. Throughout this maneuver we ensured
that the medial pressure was as co-axial as possible, so as to prevent any further shear injury to the venous
sinus and petrous carotid artery during the reduction attempt. Hemorrhage from both the venous sinus and
petrous carotid artery decreased dramatically with this maneuver. Short titanium plates were applied across
the fracture lines, both anterior and posterior, and secured with 4 mm screws. Fixation via titanium plates and
screws occurred speciﬁcally across the spheno–squamousal suture line anterior-inferiorly via two separate
plates, and also along the mastoid–occipital suture line posterior-inferiorly utilizing a single plate (Fig. 3).
The bleeding at this point decreased signiﬁcantly, with cessation of the arterial hemorrhage deep within
the temporal bone. The plating can be seen in Fig. 3.

The residual bleeding from the venous sinus injury was subsequently packed with gel foam without

difﬁculty.

F.A. Zeiler, C.J. Kazina / Trauma Case Reports 3 (2016) 12–17

15

Fig. 2. Pre-operative CT brain displaying bone windows. CT = computed tomography. Panels A, B, and C: Axial CT images at the level of
temporal bone displaying a transverse petrous temporal bone fracture with diastases. Panel D: Arrow indicates the fracture of the petrous
temporal one extending into the carotid canal compromising the course of the internal carotid artery.

Unfortunately at this point, the entire left hemisphere appeared quite swollen and ischemic (likely from an
ICA injury). An intra-parenchymal strain gage intracranial pressure (ICP) monitor was placed and the wound
was closed, leaving the bone off. The patient was subsequently transferred to ICU.

Upon arrival in ICU, the ICP was ranging from 40 to 60 mm Hg despite maximal medical therapy. Over
the course of the following 6 h the patient developed diabetes insipidus. A CT scan of the brain demonstrated
signiﬁcant left hemispheric ischemia, contralateral hemispheric injuries, and suspected injury to the mesen-
cephalon and pons (Fig. 4). It was elected to withdrawal care. The patient died 6 h after the surgery was
completed.

Discussion

Displaced temporal bone fractures, in the setting of venous sinus or petrous carotid injuries, pose signiﬁ-
cant challenges in achieving hemostasis. Standard techniques in dealing with venous sinus injuries via

16

F.A. Zeiler, C.J. Kazina / Trauma Case Reports 3 (2016) 12–17

Fig. 3. Post-operative CT brain displaying fracture reduction and plating. CT = computed tomography. Panels A and B: Reduction of
previously transverse temporal bone fracture. Panel C: Anterior lateral plating seen (arrow) leading to the ﬁxation and maintenance of
fracture reduction.

packing can be impeded. Our case describes a potential surgical technique to aid with hemostasis in these
extreme situations.

A few important points can be gleamed from our case. First, fracture reduction is essential. Common
orthopedic principles apply even though the injury is in the skull base. Fracture reduction leads to improved
hemostasis. This could be seen with simple medially applied pressure directed along the axis of the EAC.
Second, ﬁxation of the reduced fracture is paramount. We utilized standard titanium plates and screws for
cranial repair. Third, packing of the venous sinus injury in order to achieve hemostasis was impossible with
the free ﬂoating component of the temporal bone fracture. This had to be secured prior to effective packing.
Fourth, the arterial bleeding from deep within the fracture site, suspected to arise from the petrous ICA,
was controlled effectively with fracture reduction and ﬁxation. This bleeding would have been extremely
difﬁcult to stop otherwise, and packing the fracture line would likely have failed. Finally, this easy to perform
technique can potentially be a life saver in the setting of impending exsanguination.

Despite the improved hemostasis with reduction and ﬁxation of the petrous temporal bone fracture in our
case, there are some limitations to what can be concluded. First, this is a single extreme case. The majority of
temporal bone fractures do not present in this manner with a hyperacute extra-axial hematoma secondary
to a venous sinus and ICA injury. Thus, the ability to generalize the principles of this case is limited. Finally,
despite adequate hemostasis post-fracture ﬁxation, the patient unfortunately died as a result of signiﬁcant
ischemia and bilateral hemispheric injuries. It should be noted, that despite achieving control of the

Fig. 4. Post-operative CT brain. CT = computed tomography. Panel A: Axial CT image at the level of the mesencephalon displaying
hypoattenuation of the midbrain (solid arrow) and bilateral uncal herniation and edema. The dashed arrow displays the area of the trans-
verse-sigmoid sinus junction that was packed with gel foam. Panels B and C: Axial CT images displaying signiﬁcant bilateral contusions,
interhemispheric subdural hematoma and left hemisphere ischemia.

F.A. Zeiler, C.J. Kazina / Trauma Case Reports 3 (2016) 12–17

17

hemorrhage, we were unable to address the suspected injury to the petrous ICA. It is this injury that likely led
to the signiﬁcant left hemispheric ischemia seen both on intra-operatively and post-operative imaging.

Conclusions

Reduction and lateral plating of displaced transverse petrous temporal bone fractures can aid signiﬁcantly

with intra-operative hemostasis in the extreme case of venous sinus and/or petrous ICA injuries.

Conﬂict of interest statement

The authors have no conﬂicts of interest to disclose.

References

[1] D.T. Lin, A.C. Lin, Surgical treatment of traumatic injuries to the cranial base, Otolaryngol. Clin. N. Am. 46 (5) (2013) 749–757.
[2] M.A. Rafferty, R. Mc Conn Walsh, M.A. Walsh, A comparison of temporal bone fracture classiﬁcation systems, Clin. Otolaryngol. 31 (4)

(2006) 287–291.

[3] H.M. Kang, M.G. Kim, S.H. Boo, et al., Comparison of the clinical relevance of traditional and new classiﬁcation systems of temporal

bone fractures, Eur. Arch. Otorhinolaryngol. 269 (8) (2012) 1893–1899.

[4] Z.A. Asha'Ari, R. Ahmad, J. Rahman, N. Kamarudin, L.W. Ishlah, Contrecoup injury in patients with traumatic temporal bone fracture,

J. Laryngol. Otol. 125 (8) (2011) 781–785.

[5] Z.A. Asha'ari, R. Ahmad, J. Rahman, R.A. Yusof, N. Kamarudin, Patterns of intracranial hemorrhage in petrous temporal bone fracture,

Auris Nasus Larynx 39 (2) (2012) 151–155.

