A 64-year-old African American male with unknown past medical history arrived in the trauma bay following a motor vehicle accident. 
On initial evaluation, the patient was alert but somewhat confused and had a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 13. 
Focused Assessment with Sonography in Trauma (FAST) exam was performed immediately following the primary survey and found to be positive in the hepatorenal space. 
The patient was hemodynamically stable and was taken for further imaging including CTs of the head, cervical spine, chest, abdomen and pelvis that revealed multiple injuries including subarachnoid hemorrhage, anterior left 3rd–8th rib fractures, right posterior 1st–3rd rib fractures, peri-hepatic and peri-splenic hematomas, and a left lower quadrant mesenteric hematoma with active extravasation. 
The patient was admitted to the ICU and underwent conservative man-agement of mesenteric, peri-hepatic, and peri-splenic hematomas. 
On hospital day 6, the patient's mental status began to deteriorate, prompting an immediate CT of his head and EEG, which were both negative. 
A repeat CT abdomen and pelvis study was not ordered at this time. 
The patient was thought to be experiencing post-traumatic encephalopathy and eventually declined to GCS 3T. 
After discussion with family, the decision was made to perform tracheostomy and laparoscopic gastrostomy tube placement. 
The patient was prepped and draped in usual sterile fashion and the tracheostomy was performed first.
We then turned our attention to the patient's abdomen for laparoscopic gastrostomy tube placement. 
We began by gaining access to the abdomen with a Veress needle through Palmer's point. 
The abdomen was insufflated to 15 mmHg. 
The patient then developed significant hypotension without a decrease in end tidal carbon dioxide. 
We partially evacuated the capnoperitoneum with no improvement in hemodynamic status. 
At this point, we rapidly inserted the laparoscope which showed widespread hemoperitoneum. 
We were unable to identify the source laparoscopically and elected to convert to an open procedure. 
Upon opening the abdomen, we were easily able to identify an active splenic hemorrhage; the splenic capsule was not specifically noted at this time. 
The spleen was rapidly medialized and the hilum was controlled manually with an immediate improvement in blood pressure. 
The spleen was removed using a GIA stapler and the remainder of the abdomen was inspected with no further injury noted. 
The patient was transfused two units of packed red blood cells and taken to the surgical intensive care unit. 
The patient recovered and was ultimately discharged 16 days later. 
Pathology report of the spleen described a “capsular laceration with focal parenchymal hemorrhage” — this is approximated as a grade 1 splenic injury according to the AAST-OIS splenic injury scale.
A 27-year-old elite-level rugby union player was participating in an international test match and sustained a blow to his head from another player's knee.
There was no loss of consciousness or memory loss, although immediately after impact the patient reported feeling confused, which resolved over several seconds.
He continued playing for an additional 15 min before alerting the head team physician (MRS) and match day doctor (JSA) about vision changes in his right eye and stating his left leg was “not responding properly”.
Upon sideline evaluation, his neurologic exam was normal despite the patient's subjective complaints.
However, his complaint of neurological deﬁcits prompted immediate application of a cervical collar and transport to the nearest Level 1 trauma center for further evaluation.
The decision for transport was based on his subjective neurological symptoms after a direct blow to the head, despite a normal examination.
Upon arrival to the emergency department the player was hemodynamically stable with a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 15.
No other injuries were identiﬁed.
His medical history included three documented head concussions that all responded to conservative measures with no prolonged symptoms, he had no other known head trauma.
Additional history was relevant for minor musculoskeletal trauma, including an acromioclavicular separation, but no other medical conditions or co-morbidities.
On exam, the player could accurately recall the event.
The neurological motor exam was unremarkable in all four extremities, including his left lower extremity.
He had intact sensation to light touch in his upper and lower extremities.
Pupils were equal, round, and reactive to light.
Extraocular movements and cranial nerves II-XII were intact.
Emergent CT scan without contrast identiﬁed a crescent shaped extra-axial ﬂuid collection consistent with a subdural hematoma and 10 mm midline shift.
The posterior and temporal horn of the right ventricle were nearly completely effaced.
The posterior aspect of the hematoma was hyperdense, consistent with an acute bleed, while the anterior half appeared isodense with the cerebral cortex.
The heterogeneous density likely represents unclotted blood anteriorly, but could also reﬂect acute on chronic bleeding or cerebrospinal ﬂuid extravasation into the subarachnoid space due to an arachnoid laceration.
There were no additional lesions noted.
The hospital's neurosurgeon was immediately contacted and the player underwent an emergent right frontoparietal craniotomy and hematoma evacuation.
The patient's rehabilitation course included inpatient and outpatient physical therapy, ultimately making a full recovery without any neurological or cognitive deﬁcits.
He subsequently retired from competitive rugby and has become a coach for a professional rugby club.
A 15-year-old woman was diagnosed with osteogenesis imperfecta (Sillence Type I) at a regional reference pediatric hospital.
Although a genetic characterization of the disease is currently underway and the patient never underwent a bone density test, she expresses the same phenotypic traits as her mother, who suﬀers from autosomal dominant OI.
Following a fall from a chair during an epileptic seizure, the young patient came to our observation.
Medical history did not predict any other fractures.
She was not taking bisphosphonates before the injury but she was taking valproic acid for epilepsy.
On physical examination the patient had blue sclera, bilateral ipoacusia, inability to ambulate, and absolute impossibility to active and passive motion of both hips due to pain.
The imaging showed acetabular fractures, which were classiﬁed as associated both-column fractures with protrusio acetabuli.
Three dimensional reconstructed computed tomography (CT) examination revealed a greater degree of comminution and displacement than could be appreciated on the plain radiographs.
Once informed consent was obtained from the patient and her parents, the preoperative preparation by the orthopaedic and anaesthesia team consisted in typing and cross matching eight units of packed red blood cells, fresh frozen plasma, cryoprecipitate, desmopressin, and interoperative cell salvage capability available for the operation.
On the ﬁfth post-trauma day, considering the young age of the patient, the comorbidities and the operative duration, we opted for the ﬁxation of the acetabula in two surgical steps.
At ﬁrst, we performed ORIF of bilateral posterior columns via Iselin approach.
A pelvic reconstruction plate was shaped and positioned along the perimeter of the pelvis until its ﬁxation.
The patient was extremely osteopenic, bones were very fragile, and the reduction obtained from the fracture was the best possible given the starting conditions.
Since on the right side the posterior synthesis alone appeared insufficient to guarantee a lasting reduction of the femoral head in the acetabulum, we drilled a Kirschner wire to provide stable ﬁxation and to avoid possible future dislocations.
The second surgical step was performed on post-injury day ten via a bilateral modiﬁed Stoppa approach and augmented by creating the lateral window of the ilioinguinal approach [5].
Bilaterally, there were multiple devitalised, free-ﬂoating, articular fragments medial to the quadrilateral surface that were deemed no-reconstructible.
Two dedicated suprapectineal plate were applied to reconstruct anterior column and quadrilateral lamina of both hips.
The post-operative period was uneventful, hemoglobin never fell below 10 mg/dl and intraoperatively the blood loss was less than 400 cl and no blood transfusion was necessary.
She was mobilized on crutches with touch weight-bearing for six weeks and partial weight-bearing for another six weeks.
After three weeks, the patient was discharged to home therapy with bisphosphonates and referred to a specialist center for OI disease.
We followed the patient weekly for one month, then monthly until the sixth month, with radiographic control at 30, 60 and 120 days.
The hips function was evaluated with Harris Hip Score (HHS) with result of 45/100 at the ﬁnal follow-up.
The Numeric Pain Rating Scale (NPRS), a segmented numeric version of the visual analog scale (VAS), used to assess pain intensity, reported a score of 5/10 (moderate pain) at the ﬁnal follow-up.
The last radiographic examination showed an adequate reduction of the fracture and a satisfactory wall and bone stock for a subsequent prosthesis: the patient developed a bilateral post-traumatic arthrosis with heterotopic calciﬁcations typical of the underlying disease.
A 16-year-old male unrestrained backseat passenger was brought to our trauma bay after a high-speed  motor vehicle collision with a rollover. 
He suffered multiple injuries, including traumatic brain injury;  complex pelvic fractures; spleen, liver, and renal injuries; and left diaphragmatic rupture. 
His initial chest X-ray (CXR) revealed his stomach herniating inside his left chest. 
He underwent immediate laparotomy and  repair of his left diaphragm. 
Intraoperatively, the surgeon examined the right diaphragm by palpation and  noted no abnormality. 
Postoperatively, the patient had a prolonged ventilator-dependence. 
His daily CXR  showed right-sided diaphragmatic abnormality but was nonspeciﬁc. 
We performed a dynamic ultrasound to evaluate the right diaphragm; the result suggested that the right diaphragm was paralysed, probably  secondary to right phrenic nerve injury. 
On 3 occasions (post-injury day 0, 4, and 15), the patient underwent  CT of the chest; none of those 3 scans reported right-sided diaphragmatic injury, despite the presence of  “hepatothorax”, as well as “hump”, “band”, and “collar” signs. 
Eventually, on post-injury day 17, the  patient underwent a diagnostic laparoscopy; we found the liver herniating into the right chest.
28-year lady was brought to the ED with an alleged history of accidental strangulation by cloth while working in ﬁelds.
The patient presented to us after 8 h of trauma.
Airway was patent and the cervical spine motion was restricted.
A patterned bruise of strangulation was present in the middle of the neck.
Larynx and cricotracheal junction were normal to palpation.
Breathing and circulation were normal and there was no neurological disability.
Mild surgical emphysema was present in the face and neck.
CECT neck revealed tracheal transection more than 50% of the circumference and an abnormally dilated segment of the esophagus.
Contrast esophagogram wasn't performed as the patient had an upfront indication of exploration.
CT Angio revealed complete luminal occlusion of left Common Carotid Artery due to thrombosis 3 cm below bifurcation; however, the contrast was present in the internal carotid artery presumably entering retrogradely from external carotid artery.
Interventional radiology expertise for CCA stenting wasn't available.
The patient was taken up for emergent exploration where complete transection of the trachea was repaired along with the esophagus.
CCA exploration revealed a contused artery not amenable to resection and end to end repair.
CCA size precluded the use of saphenous graft due to anticipated luminal discrepancy and subsequent turbulent ﬂow.
PTFE and Dacron couldn't be arranged in the middle of the night.
The operating surgeon decided to manage CCA contusion and thrombosis non-operatively as the patient presented after 8 h and majority strokes in Grade 4 injury would have manifested in this period.
CCA ligation wasn't done in the apprehension of antegrade thrombus propagation post ligation.
Unfortunately, the patient developed right hemiparesis in the immediate post-operative period.
MR brain with angiogram revealed thrombus propagation involving ICA and Left MCA and conﬁrmed stroke.
The patient was started on anticoagulation and intensive physiotherapy.
Her maximal power was 2/5 in the upper limb and 3/5 in the lower limb.
With physiotherapy, she started regaining strength and by the third postoperative day, she had regained full power and could write and walk independently.
Follow up Doppler showed no recanalization.
The rest post-op period was uneventful and the patient was discharged home neurologically intact, on antithrombotic therapy. 
We describe the case of a 15 year old boy who presented with generalised abdominal pain following  a seemingly minor collision at weekend soccer.
Investigation revealed a grade IV pancreatic injury that was subsequently managed with pancreatic stent insertion by endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) and total parenteral nutrition (TPN) prior to recommencing low fat diet 10 days post-injury.
A previously well 15 year old male presented to the Emergency department at 1600 h, 4 hours after a seemingly minor blunt abdominal injury during a weekend soccer match.
Initially following the impact of another player's knee to the abdomen, the adolescent rested out of the game for half an hour before returning to play the second half.
Following the game, he returned home, tolerated an afternoon meal before the gradual onset of constant, dull, severe, non-radiating, generalised abdominal pain that was not exacerbated by movement.
Due to family concerns, the patient presented to our Level I Tertiary referral trauma centre by own means.
He was normotensive and not tachycardic.
The patient had no signiﬁcant medical history.
Physical examination revealed a guarded abdomen.
Focused Assessment with Sonography for Trauma (FAST) suggested a trace of free ﬂuid in the sagittal pelvic image.
The initial blood pathology was normal except for an elevation of amylase 410 units/l, lipase 771 units/l and white cell count 12.2 × 109/l.
He was admitted for observation and serial clinical and FAST assessments.
The patient's symptoms failed to improve after 24 h observation, during which time he developed shoulder tip and central back pain.
A repeat FAST 24 h post-admission again revealed possible trace free ﬂuid in the sagittal pelvic images with new concerns regarding trace free ﬂuid to the spleno-renal angle.
A computed tomography (CT) scan was performed with intravenous contrast.
This revealed a transverse laceration through the neck of the pancreas with normal enhancement of the pancreas and no pancreatic duct dilatation consistent with American Association for the Surgery of Trauma (AAST) Organ Injury Scale (OIS) grade IV injury.
Additionally there was a small volume, low density intraperitoneal ﬂuid, retroperitoneal stranding, omental contusion and a small linear laceration of the posterior left kidney without peri-nephric collection (AAST-OIS Grade II injury).
There was no injury to the other solid organs or the duodenum.
The patient was kept nil by mouth with intravenous antibiotics, TPN and octreotide 100 mg three times a day via a percutaneous inserted central catheter (PICC).
Ongoing central abdominal pain consistent with acute pancreatitis prompted further imaging on day 2 by magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP).
This conﬁrmed the CT ﬁndings and the patient was booked for ERCP the following day.
At ERCP, the pancreatic duct was selectively cannulated and contrast extravasation was seen at the pancreatic neck.
A 5 cm 5Fr pigtail plastic stent was inserted across the defect and the patient remained on TPN and octreotide for 10 days.
Repeat MRCP 10 days later showed a contiguous main pancreatic duct of normal calibre and appearance with no evidence of transection and improvement of the peri-pancreatic oedema.
The patient was allowed to resume a low fat diet and TPN was weaned and ceased.
The patient returned home on pantoprazole 40 mg daily, he was electively brought back to hospital 12 days later for ERCP and stent removal.
At ERCP the pigtail stent was not seen, having likely passed out, and there was no evidence of extravasation of contrast, consistent with resolution of injury.
Follow-up as an outpatient was without incident over a three-month period.
The patient has been advised not to partake in contact sports for six months.
A 25-year-old male camel caregiver presented to the Emergency Department of Al-Ain Hospital 1 h after being bitten several times in the left side of his head and neck by a 15-year-old male camel.
The injury occurred in the farm while the patient was trying to feed the camel.
The camel turned aggressive and strongly and repeatedly gripped the patient's face between its jaws, lifting the patient up in the air while shaking and throwing him forcefully to the ground.
These bites were repeated four times to the patient's face and neck.
The patient was able to rescue himself only after putting his headscarf inside the camel's mouth.
On clinical examination, the patient was fully conscious, alert, but in severe distress.
His blood pressure was 159/91 mm Hg.
Pulse rate was 47 beats per minute, and body temperature was 36.5 °C.
There were multiple puncture and laceration wounds on the left side of his face and neck.
Inspection of the facial wounds showed a swollen left eye with lacerations on the eyelid and eyebrow with extensive subconjunctival hemorrhage.
An approximately 13 cm lacerated wound on the left side of the face extended from the temporal region to the left chin with surrounding skin erythema.
There was bleeding from the left ear with a laceration of the crus of the left helix.
Neck inspection showed a 7 cm laceration in the left submandibular area with no obvious injury to the adjacent great vessels.
The patient was given 0.5 ml of tetanus toxoid vaccine intramuscularly and was admitted to the hospital.
A trauma computed tomography (CT) was performed to detect other injuries.
Maxillofacial CT without contrast showed a comminuted fracture of the left nasal bone, a fracture of the medial orbital wall with sagging of medial rectus muscle into the fracture space, medial rectus muscle hematoma, fracture of lacrimal bone and displacement of piece of it into the orbit, left preseptal hematoma, complete opaciﬁcation of left intraocular content, crystalline lens was not identiﬁed, and the eye appeared as one chamber with loss of the eyewall integrity.
Although the left optic nerve appeared stretched, there were no obvious CT ﬁndings for its injury.
CT angiographic study of the neck arteries showed no evidence of active extravasation, dissection or thrombosis.
Prophylactic antibiotic using intravenous ceftriaxone and metronidazole was commenced.
The patient was taken to the operation room, and the wounds were explored and debrided under general anesthesia.
Upper lid (2 cm) full thickness laceration, eyebrow (3.5 cm), lateral to lateral canthal area laceration and inferior bulbar conjunctiva were repaired.
There was a massive corneal laceration with expulsion of the eye content.
Salvaging the left eye was not possible, and evisceration of the eye was performed.
Intraoperative examination of the left cheek wound site revealed macerated muscle with a deep wound penetrating the underlying superﬁcial musculoaponeurotic system.
The left Parotid duct was partially transected over the masseter muscle.
This was approximated and primarily repaired using Nylon 8/0 sutures, and the parotid gland capsule was also sutured.
The buccal branch of the facial nerve could not be identiﬁed.
The nasal bone fracture was managed with closed reduction.
The lacerations of the left auricle and the left submandibular region were closed in layers.
On a postoperative day 6, the patient developed a small left-sided sialocele which has rapidly progressed into a ﬁstula.
This was managed with Hyoscine tablets, transdermal scopolamine, and pressure dressing.
A favorable response was observed after three days.
The patient was discharged home on day 9 in a good general condition and was placed on Clindamycin 600 mg 4 times a day, Hyoscine 20 mg 3 times a day, and Erythromycin 0.5% ophthalmic ointment.
A follow up at one month showed a satisfactory scar, completely healed salivary ﬁstula, and a residual weak upper lip function.
The patient gave written informed consent for publication of his clinical images in this manuscript.
A 75-year-old male with history of atrial ﬁbrillation on Rivaroxaban was struck by a motor vehicle.
Upon arrival he was hypotensive but with a Glasgow Coma Score of 15.
A strategy of permissive hypotension was maintained based upon the patient's mental status.
Plain radiographs and CT imaging were obtained and demonstrated multiple rib fractures and a celiac artery injury with contrast extravasation and associated hematoma.
He was immediately transported to our hybrid operating room and placed under general anesthesia.
Percutaneous femoral artery access was obtained and aortography was performed.
This demonstrated a complete avulsion of the celiac artery with distal reconstitution via retrograde ﬁling from the superior mesenteric artery.
Initially, given the stability of the patient, attempts were made to traverse the injury to perform endovascular intervention in a hybrid operating room but these were unsuccessful despite the use of multiple wire, catheter, and sheath combinations.
The patient was already prepped for and immediately underwent a midline laparotomy, as there was obvious concern that he may either decompensate or the injury might not be amenable to endovascular intervention.
The celiac axis and aorta were explored through the lesser sac and control of the celiac origin was obtained with a side-biting aortic clamp with scant back-bleeding from the distal celiac stump.
The splenic artery and common hepatic artery were isolated and the left gastric artery was ligated.
The gastroduodenal artery was patent; however, worsening hepatic ischemia was visualized during the case this ligation alone was felt to be unsafe.
Therefore an aorto-celiac bypass with a 6-mm Dacron graft was performed utilizing the supra-celiac aorta as the inﬂow source.
The celiac stump was over-sewn.
A temporary abdominal closure was performed and the patient was transferred to the surgical intensive care unit for resuscitation.
His abdomen was closed four days after his initial operation.
A prolonged hospital course ensued with complications including a pancreatic leak with pseudocyst formation necessitating ERCP and endoscopic cyst-gastrotomy, pneumonia, acute kidney injury, and splenic artery pseudoaneurysm managed by exclusion and embolization.
The patient was discharged home and expired 22 months after his trauma from acute respiratory failure leading to hypoxic brain injury.
Consent was obtained for the publication of this report.
A 72 year-old male with a history of myocardial infarction and stroke (without any residual side effects) presented with a recurrent left-sided subdural hematoma within a seven-month period.
The patient originally presented to the neurosurgical clinic complaining of a two-day history of personality changes, urinary incontinence, balance instability, and headaches.
Physical examination was signiﬁcant for a decreased level of consciousness, cognitive impairment, ataxic gait, speech difﬁculty, right-sided hemianopsia, mild third and sixth nerve palsy, as well as papilledema on fundoscopic examination.
A computerized tomography (CT) image revealed a chronic recurrent left-sided subdural hematoma.
The patient was admitted from the emergency department and the subdural hematoma was drained with placement of a valveless subdural peritoneal shunt.
The patient, in the supine position and under general endotracheal anesthesia, was prepped and draped with routine sterile methods, including the left frontal, parietal and occipital areas, in addition to the ipsilateral side of the chest, neck and abdomen.
Endoscopy was used to pass the peritoneal shunt up to the parieto-occipital juncture.
A burr hole was created and the dura opened in the left frontal area.
After evacuation of the hematoma, a ventricular catheter was connected to the peritoneal tubing.
Physical examination two days postoperatively revealed complete resolution of all neurological deﬁcits.
The patient presented to a one-month follow-up appointment without the presence of any neurological symptoms.
CT imaging of the brain showed complete resolution of the hematoma with no new recurrences.
A 46 year old male was an alcohol-intoxicated restrained passenger in a head-on motor vehicle collision, suffering blunt force abdominal trauma.
At the collision site EMS recorded a Glasgow Coma Score of 15 with stable vital signs.
He was transferred to Cabell Huntington Hospital where he was intubated and found to be tachycardic and profoundly academic to an arterial pH of 7.19 with accompanying base deﬁcit of -11.
Hemoglobin was 12.9, hematocrit 37.1, PT 11.5 sec, and APTT 23.5 sec.
CT showed acute thoracic aortic rupture with a large volume of blood inferiorly along the aorta, right middle and lower lobe lung contusions, and a 4 cm laceration along the inferior lobe of the liver with blood in the renal hilum suggesting right renovascular injury and free ﬂuid within the pelvis.
He was transferred to Saint Mary’s Medical Center for emergent management of aortic rupture.
Emergent surgical management of the ruptured thoracic aorta was completed by the cardiothoracic team.
Upon completion, initiation of exploratory laparotomy was begun, noting blood in the peritoneum and bile staining in the right upper quadrant associated with the transverse and hepatic ﬂexures of the colon.
The gallbladder was visibly distended, ﬁrm to palpation, and discolored but showed no signs of rupture.
Subcapsular hematoma was appreciated along the right posterior lobe of the liver but showed no signs of actively expanding or gross laceration.
Open cholescystectomy with intraoperative cholangiogram was performed on a thick, distended and grossly-discolored gallbladder consistent with hemorrhage into the gallbladder lumen.
Conray contrast was used to demonstrate a completely intact biliary tree with extravasation noted from the common bile duct.
Duodenal injury was ruled out by passing methylene blue through the orogastric tube with no extravasation appreciated and colon was assessed via direct visualization by Kocher maneuver and mobilization of the hepatic ﬂexure.
Due to the duration of the thoracic aorta repair and the exploratory laparotomy, the decision was made to place a 16-French T-tube in the common bile duct in addition to two large #24 Jackson-Pratt tubes in the vicinity of the bile duct.
The patient was maintained on ventilator in the neurotrauma intensive care unit.
In the postoperative period the T-tube drained golden brown bile and was well-tolerated.
Urine collection via Foley catheter showed blood-tinged urine that persisted until POD 10 but then spontaneously resolved.
During this time on POD 6 the patient underwent gastrostomy with placement of percutaneous gastrostomy and tracheostomy tubes.
Due to the PEG becoming disloged on POD 8 the patient underwent exploratory laparotomy and gastrostomy with jejunostomy tube placement and removal of foreign body.
Evaluation on postoperative day 10 showed successful drainage of the operative site via T-tube.
The patient continued to improve and was discharged on POD 28 with T-tube and J tubes in place.
Recovery was complicated during the outpatient course as frank blood began appearing in the patient’s urine on POD 39 and the patient began complaining of pain around tube sites.
CT urogram showed no residual renal injury and was presumed to be due to residual posttraumatic blood accumulation.
Of note, a small amount of ﬂuid was appreciated in the anterior right middle and upper abdomen along the inferior right lobe of the liver not seen previously but consistent with postoperative seroma.
A urinary tract infection was diagnosed and managed medically.
T tube cholangiogram revealed no abnormalities and the the T-tube was removed along with J-tube on POD 54.
The remainder of the patient’s recovery period was uneventful with regards to hepatobiliary procedures, however frank blood in the urine persisted for an additional 6 months due complications of subclinical traumatic kidney injury sustained during the motor vehicle collision.
A 54-year-old male competitive powerlifter with a past medical history of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and coronary artery disease presented to our emergency department (ED) with a complaint of right greater than left lower abdominal pain.
He had been performing a back-squat with 670 lbs.
when he felt a painful “pop” in his lower abdomen.
He also reported experiencing urinary urgency, frequency, and hematuria.
He denied any lower extremity motor weakness or sensory changes.
On visual inspection, there was ecchymosis at the base of his penis.
No obvious scrotal swelling was seen.
Initial physical examination by the ED physician was positive for abdominal distension, tenderness, and guarding, but no rebound tenderness or signs of peritonitis were elicited.
A rapid bedside ultrasound examination was negative for intraperitoneal pathology.
A CT angiogram of the abdomen and pelvis was performed followed by CT urogram.
Results showed widening of the pubic symphysis measuring up to 18 mm.
Close review of the CT imaging demonstrated small amounts of air in both sacroiliac joints, but it was felt that the overall stability of the pelvic ring had not been compromised and that the air may represent chronic degenerative joint changes.
There was also a large intraluminal bladder hematoma taking up over 50% of the bladder volume with contrast extravasation along the right side of the retropubic space anterior to the prostate.
The patient was taken to the operating room (OR) by a urologist for cystoscopy and intraluminal hematoma evacuation.
Cauterization of the bleeding was unsuccessful so the procedure was concluded and the patient was transferred to the interventional radiology suite.
An arteriogram was performed which showed active extravasation of a “replaced” or “accessory” obturator artery, an anatomic variant of the obturator artery as a branch from the inferior epigastric artery rather than from the usual anterior division of the internal iliac artery.
This artery was coiled and repeat arteriogram showed no further extravasation.
No injury to the internal iliac artery system was seen.
Several hours later, despite the embolization procedure and continuous bladder irrigation, the patient continued to experience hematuria.
The treatment teams decide to return to the OR for open exploration and bladder repair.
A low midline incision was used to enter the retropubic space and signiﬁcant hematoma was evacuated.
A running suture was used to repair a hole in the bladder wall.
Repeat cystoscopy was performed and an additional suture was used to seal a small intraluminal leak.
The retropubic space continued to ooze blood so packing was placed around the prostate and hemostasis was achieved.
A temporary abdominal closure was performed with a plan to return to the OR for removal of packing material and repeat exploration.
On hospital day 3, the patient was brought back to the OR, packing material was removed, and no further bleeding was noted.
At this point, the orthopaedic trauma team was asked to re-examine his symphysis given the direct visualization of the pelvic ring disruption.
The diastasis was measured to be 30 mm using a sterile ruler so the decision was made to proceed with plate ﬁxation of the symphysis. This was accomplished with a Jungbluth clamp along the anterior surface for reduction and placement of a Synthes 3.5 mm 6-hole pubic symphysis plate (Synthes) with 3.5 mm Bone Screw Fasteners. A medium Hemovac drain was placed and primary closure was performed of his fascia and skin incision. Post-operatively he was allowed to weight bear for transfers only. By 3 months following surgery, he was allowed to weight-bear as tolerated, and has gone on to do well without any radiographic or clinical signs of implant failure.
Our patient is a 15-year-old boy who was the victim of a hit and run accident while on his skateboard.
He was unresponsive in the ﬁeld with multiple injuries including a deformed left upper extremity and a tension pneumothorax requiring needle decompression.
He was emergently brought to our trauma center and stabilized.
Initial CT head showed a small right subdural hematoma with contralateral left-sided subdural hematoma as well as multiple temporal contusions with a depressed temporal skull fracture that communicated with a basilar skull fracture.
The patient at this time was agitated however localizing with a GCS of 7T.
Given the basilar skull fractures, the patient underwent a CT Angiogram of the brain a couple hours after the initial CT scan which showed a 3.5 cm newly expanding right-sided epidural hematoma warranting emergent evacuation.
This ﬁnding was not appreciated on the initial scan.
Shortly before operative intervention, the patient became bradycardic, hypertensive and tachypnic; signs of impending herniation.
Intra-operatively, he was found to have a signiﬁcant right-sided comminuted skull fracture extending from the temporal fossa to the basilar skull.
A hemi-craniectomy was performed and a large laceration was noted to the dural vessels as well as the middle meningeal artery.
The epidural hematoma at this point was causing severe mass eﬀect, which would have been fatal had subsequent imaging not been performed.
Post operatively he was taken to the Pediatric ICU.
He was weaned off sedation and extubated several days later, noted to be neurologically intact with a GCS of 15.
He worked well with the physical, occupational, and cognitive therapy services and was medically stabilized for transfer to a rehab center.
58 years old obese lady was brought in emergency department by rescue team.
She was accompanied by her son.
She presented in critical condition, was confused, tachypneic and tachycardiac.
According to attendant, she was complaining for last 2–3 days of abdominal pain, fever, decreased oral intake and decreased urination.
Presently she was taking her antihypertensive medication.
Few minutes after arrival to emergency department she collapsed and was coded.
She was pulseless with electrical cardiac activity (PEA).
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) was initiated according to Adult Cardiac Life Support (ACLS) protocol.
Peripheral vascular access was difficult with several failed attempts.
Patient was revived after 5 min of chest compression, endotracheal tube ventilation and single shot of adrenaline.
Initial investigations revealed raised WCC, CRP and very high blood glucose levels.
She was previously non-diabetic.
Working diagnosis of septic shock was made.
She was put on broad spectrum antibiotics which were changed according to sensitivity report of blood and urine cultures.
Femoral arterial line was used for monitoring, ﬂuid and drug administration.
She was sedated and put on invasive ventilation.
She was shifted to intensive care unit for monitoring and management.
She remained oliguric despite ﬂuid replacement.
Computed tomography (CT) abdomen was performed which revealed impacted proximal right ureteric stone with dilatation of pelvicaleceal system and bi-basal lung consolidation.
She was reviewed by urology team for urosepsis and JJ stent was place to relieve the obstruction.
Frack pus and old blood was drained which conﬁrmed the reason of shock to be the urosepsis.
Urine output improved but she still needed renal replacement therapy.
Fever improved but it didn't touch the baseline.
Similarly WCC and CRP were showing a decreasing trend.
On 6th post admission day patient regained consciousness, urine output improved and invasive ventilatory support was withdrawn.
She was transferred out of intensive care unit.
She again developed high grade fever, WCC and CRP was persistently raised.
Now that patient was conscious and oriented, she started complaining of left shoulder joint pain associated with weakness of left upper limb.
Orthopedics team was asked to review the patient.
On initial examination, mild joint eﬀusion was suspected and turbid blood stained ﬂuid was aspirated.
Iatrogenic skeletal injury during CPR was suspected and radiograph was obtained which was unremarkable other than degenerative changes.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan was advised to rule out soft tissue pathology.
MRI showed large effusion with surrounding tissue edema, bone marrow edema with gas formation in proximal humerus.
Based on these ﬁndings MRI suggested the diﬀerential diagnoses of septic arthritis with proximal humerus osteomyelitis, gas gangrene and sequelae of proximal humeral intraosseous line.
This was something new for the whole team.
All notes were reviewed again but there was no mention of intraosseous line insertion.
Resuscitation team was contacted and inquired about the intraosseous line and they conﬁrm that intraosseous line was inserted for initial resuscitation and it was removed when femoral arterial line was secured, but they forgot to mention it in their notes.
Mystery was solved.
Shoulder joint was decompressed and washed arthroscopically.
She was also diagnosed to have type II diabetes mellitus by endocrinology team and was managed accordingly.
Rest of her recovery was uneventful.
She was booked by urologist for removal of stone at a later stage.
A 47-year-old man was referred to our emergency department after experiencing blunt abdominal trauma 5 d earlier.The mechanism of injury was a blow to the epigastrium caused by a fall.
His vital signs included a blood pressure of 120/ 70 mmHg, heart rate of 72 beats per min, body temperature of 37.2 °C, and respiratory rate of 20 breaths per min.
Laboratory tests revealed a white blood cell count of 21,310/mm3, mild increases in serum amylase/lipase levels (471/688 U/L), and a C-reactive protein level of 25.71 mg/dL.
An abdominal CT scan revealed discontinuity between the pancreas head and neck with peripancreatic ﬂuid collection.
The patient was diagnosed with a grade-III pancreatic injury.
His hemodynamic status remained stable over the 5 d following the fall.
First, we performed ERCP, which demonstrated disruption of the main pancreatic duct with leakage at the neck portion of the pancreas.
A 5-Fr 9-cm endoscopic pancreatic stent was inserted into the pancreatic duct across the disrupted portion.
Next, a percutaneous drainage catheter was placed at the site of peripancreatic ﬂuid collection.
A follow-up CT scan revealed no exacerbation of the pancreatic injury and decreased peripancreatic ﬂuid collection volume.
The patient's symptoms improved after endoscopic treatment and percutaneous catheter insertion.
The percutaneous catheter was removed on hospital day 20, and the patient was discharged on hospital day 26.
Four months after discharge, follow-up ERCP was performed and revealed no leakage at the disruption site but stricture around the leakage site.
The initial stent was replaced with a 7-Fr 9-cm endoscopic pancreatic stent to dilate the stricture site.
ERCP was performed again at 7 months after discharge, and revealed mild stricture of the leakage site without leakage.
Therefore, the stent was removed.
Another 4 months later, the patient had experienced no further adverse events.
A 37-year-old male carpenter presented after a 20-foot fall from a ladder at work.
His GCS was 15 in the Trauma Bay and FAST exam was negative.
Physical exam demonstrated a scalp laceration and pain with pelvic compression.
There was no blood at the urethral meatus and no scrotal hematoma but Foley catheter placement yielded gross blood.
Pelvis x-ray showed a pelvic ring fracture and CT scan conﬁrmed a crescent fracture of the left ilium with left superior and inferior pubic rami fractures.
A CT cystogram demonstrated entrapment of the bladder in the left superior pubic ramus fracture with no contrast extravasation, and residual contrast in the bladder showed the entrapment on plain ﬁlm.
The patient was taken to the operating room the next day for open reduction and internal ﬁxation of his pelvis fracture with release of the entrapped bladder.
After careful dissection, a Cobb elevator was used to pry the left superior pubic ramus fracture apart, and the bladder was teased free from the fracture site.
A tear in the bladder wall extending into the muscularis layer but not through the mucosa was repaired with absorbable sutures in a mattress pattern.
The fracture site was irrigated and ﬁxed with a small fragment reconstruction plate.
Percutaneous ﬁxation of the posterior pelvic ring injury was performed with a sacroiliac screw.
The patient was given peri-operative antibiotics per routine and discharged with the Foley in place for two weeks, toe-touch weightbearing on the aﬀected extremity.
Two weeks after surgery, repeat cystogram demonstrated no active extravasation from the bladder.
The Foley was removed and the patient passed a voiding trial.
At 6-week follow up his fractures were healing well and he had no urinary symptoms.
By 4 months after surgery, he had returned to work and has experienced no complications, now 18 months after injury.
Isolated gallbladder injury, secondary to a blunt abdominal trauma, is a rare ﬁnding in children.
The presence of vague symptoms and the unknown dynamic of the trauma may increase the diagnostic challenge especially in pediatrics.
A conservative management has been proposed in some particular cases in adults, but remains controversial in children.
We report a case of a 5 year old boy who presented an isolated gallbladder lesion secondary to a blunt abdominal trauma.
The surgical treatment was delayed for non-medical reasons, which gave us the possibility to try a conservative approach.
A 5 years old boy with unremarkable previous medical history was transferred to our center, from another hospital, for the management of a blunt abdominal trauma.
He was the victim of an accidental bicycle crush, in which he got a head trauma and the handlebars hit his epigastrium.
He was admitted to another facility 2 days before admission.
A brain CT scan was done and no abnormalities were detected.
Ultrasound of the abdomen and pelvis showed the presence of free peritoneal ﬂuid, and an abdominal CT scan demonstrated a distended gallbladder containing low-density material of mixed signal intensity consistent with blood between the internal and external wall.
A laparotomy was proposed.
The parents refused to give consent to the proposed procedure and he was transferred to our hospital for further management.
At his arrival to our department, the child was suffering from diffuse abdominal pain and vomiting, without any localized tenderness on physical exam or abdominal distention.
He was having normal bowel movement, was hemodynamically stable and afebrile.
His laboratory tests showed the absence of anemia (Hb 12.1 g/dL, Hct 37%) or any signiﬁcant elevation of his liver and pancreatic function tests (ALT 47 U/L, AST 37 U/L, direct bilirubin 0.4 mg/dL, indirect bilirubin 0.9 mg/dL, amylase 34 U/L, lipase 9 U/L, ALP 135 U/L, GGT 16 U/L, normal PT and PTT).
Amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (100 mg/kg/day) was started IV (WBC 16.400/μL, N 86.1%, L 4.8%, M 8.6%, E 0%, B 0.3%, C reactive protein 15 mg/L, procalcitonin 1.21 ng/mL).
Repeat abdominal ultrasound and CT scan conﬁrmed the presence of a dilated gallbladder with echogenic sludge and a peritoneal ﬂuid around the gallbladder and in the Douglas space.
MRI cholangiography showed the above ﬁndings without apparent perforation of the gallbladder.
To rule out a gallbladder laceration, laparotomy and cholecystectomy were proposed.
For the second time the parents refused the operation.
Since the patient was clinically stable, we elected to observe him in hospital.
On day 6 post trauma, the child was still complaining of diffuse abdominal pain.
An echo-guided abdominal needle aspiration of the peritoneal ﬂuid showed the presence of bile in the abdomen, which conﬁrmed the suspicion of gallbladder perforation.
Abdominal laparotomy was performed then, and revealed a 2 cm perforation of the posterior wall of the gallbladder with necrotic edges plugged by the liver.
A cholecystectomy in addition to a peritoneal cavity lavage was performed.
He was discharged on day 3 post surgery without complications.
A 29 years old male patient presented with severe abdominal pain and distention as a result of blunt abdominal trauma sustained in a motor vehicle accident 2 h previously.
At presentation, the patient was fully conscious, normotensive with a pulse rate of 112/min.
The haemoglobin was 13.6 g/dL.
Multiple bruises and abrasions were evident over the anterior chest and epigastrium.
The abdomen was distended and peritonitic.
The patient was also tender over the left lower anterior chest wall; air entry was normal.
Radiological investigations revealed a pneumoperitoneum and fractures involving ribs 10, 11 and 12 along the left anterior chest wall.
At laparotomy serosanguinous ﬂuid with undigested food particles was noted.
A full thickness anterior gastric perforation measuring 5 cm extended proximally from the pylorus along the longitudinal gastric axis (Fig. 1).
This was classiﬁed as a Grade II gastric injury (Table 1) [4].
Haematomas were noted over the transverse colon, jejunum and ileum and were managed conservatively.
The gastric perforation was repaired in a standard fashion.
The patient made an unremarkable and was discharged on the 7th post-operative day.
The patient sustained a shrapnel injury in a local armed conﬂict in Eastern Ukraine as a result of mortaring 120-mm mines.
First aid was provided in a military ﬁeld hospital.
The patient's condition was severe at admission, with a Glasgow Coma Scale score of 11.
The pupils were equal and reactive to light.
The patient was breathing spontaneously, with a respiratory rate of 19 cycles/min.
Vesicular breathing was heard in the upper lung ﬁeld, which was attenuated at the left lung apex.
Heart sounds were rhythmical and muﬄed.
The patient had a blood pressure of 80/60 mm Hg, and heart rate of 96 bpm.
A round-shaped injury, with approximately 1-cm diameter, with irregular edges in the left temporal region and moderate bleeding, was found.
Multiple irregular-shaped injuries, with 0.5-cm to 2-cm diameter, were found on the left anterolateral chest surface.
Aseptic bandages were applied, and vital functions were stabilised.
The patient was transferred to a regional clinical hospital by helicopter.
Brain SCT showed a penetrating, non-perforating skull and brain injury, with entrance hole in the squamous part of the left temporal bone.
Areas of increased density of brain parenchyma were seen in the temporal lobe, along the injury canal, represented by brain contusion and crush injury foci with haemorrhages (Fig. 1).
Chest SCT showed reduced volume of the left lung.
Wedge-shaped thickening of the parenchyma of the superior lobe of the left lung, with a wide base facing pericostal pleura, could be seen (Fig. 2).
The patient had a penetrating multifragmental craniocerebral injury with three foreign bodies of metallic density and small bone fragments in temporal lobe parenchyma (left side), and focal temporal lobe contusions and intracerebral haematomas (left side).
Penetrating heart injury with a foreign body in the myocardium, left lung contusion and left-sided haemopneumothorax were found.
Left thoracotomy was initially performed after the SCT and diagnosis.
Left ventricle injury was sutured.
The superior lobe of the left lung was subjected to atypical resection.
The pleural cavity was drained.
During the surgery, a penetrating injury was detected on the posterolateral wall of the left ventricle, with a 5 × 5-mm hole.
The hole was sewn with a U-shaped seam on a Teﬂon gasket.
The latter was resected instrumentally considering the perforated injury canal with a haematoma in the V lung segment.
No metal fragment was found in the pericardium or pleural cavity during the surgery.
Surgical treatment of penetrating gunshot craniocerebral injury was performed after vital function stabilisation.
Intracerebral left temporal lobe haematoma, one metal fragment and small bone fragments were removed.
Damage to the MCA branches and intensive bleeding from the left MCA branches were detected.
Temporary MCA clipping and haemostasis were performed using bipolar coagulation and Surgicel.
No bleeding was noted after temporary clip removal.
The left temporal and frontal bones (less than 9 × 10 cm) were resected, and duraplasty was performed using autogenous tissues.
The following day after the surgery, the follow-up brain SCT showed brain matter prolapse to the craniotomy bone defect, air along the injury channel and two foreign bodies of metallic density at the end of the injury channel (Fig. 3).
A follow-up echocardiography showed a foreign body (projectile fragment) penetrating into the depth of the left ventricle wall (basal areas under the base of posterior mitral leaﬂet) without traumatic damage to mitral leaﬂet structures.
Myocardial contractility was preserved (Fig. 4).
A follow-up electrocardiography showed subendocardial hypoxia and microfocal myocardial changes.
Due to the changes revealed by electrocardiogram and echocardiography, the patient was transported to Amosov National Institute of Cardiovascular Surgery, Kyiv, Ukraine, for further treatment.
The patient underwent surgery to remove the foreign body from the left ventricle's myocardium.
Sternotomy was performed during the surgery, and the pericardium was opened.
A CPB pump was connected.
Right and partial left atriotomies were performed.
A metal fragment was found and removed from under the posterior wall of the left ventricle.
The left ventricle cavity was revised.
Air embolism was prevented, and the cardiac chambers were sealed.
Subsequently, heart function was restored.
Haemostasis was performed.
The pericardium and anterior mediastinum were drained.
No complications were detected in the postoperative period.
The patient was transported to a military hospital for further rehabilitation after 8 days.
A follow-up brain SCT was performed 3 months after the injury.
In a non-contrast study, a 1.5 × 1-cm hyperdense focus was found in the left temporal lobe in the burr hole.
Given the shape, location and connection with the MCA, a pseudoaneurysm of the M2 segment of the left MCA was suspected (Fig. 5).
Selective cerebral angiography conﬁrmed dissectional aneurysm of the M2 segment of the left MCA, with three MCA branches outgoing from the aneurysm to the temporal lobe, gross stenosis of M2 segment before the aneurysm (Fig. 6).
The patient underwent X-ray endovascular deconstructive exclusion of dissected M2 aneurysm (temporal branch of the left MCA) with detachable microcoils.
During temporary M2 segment occlusion, the MCA branches supplying the left temporal lobe were retrogradely contrasted from the vertebral artery through cortical collaterals.
The MCA branch supplying the superior sections of the left temporal lobe was retrogradely contrasted from the left internal carotid artery through collaterals from the parietal MCA branches.
The patient underwent MoCA with a 4-min interval.
The results were not worse than those during the preoperative tests.
Endovascular stationary aneurysm occlusion was performed with aneurysm-bearing M2 branch of the left MCA.
Detachable microcoils, GDC Ultrasoft 2 mm × 6 cm and MicroPlex Helical-Soft 2 mm × 68 cm, were placed in this branch.
In follow-up angiographic studies, the aneurysm was not contrasted; the arteries contrasting the left temporal lobe were retrogradely contrasted through cortical collaterals from the vertebrobasilar system and parietal left MCA branches.
Postoperative follow-up MoCA showed that the outcome did not deteriorate (Fig. 7).
No data were found conﬁrming the functioning saccular aneurysm during follow-up selective cerebral angiography 3 months after X-ray endovascular occlusion.
Blood ﬂow to all MCA branches was restored retrogradely through available cortical collaterals, except for embolised M2 with the aneurysm (Fig. 8).
After follow-up angiography, plastic surgery was performed for extensive defect of left temporal and frontal bones by using a custom titanium plate based on stereolithographic 3D model.
The patient was discharged postoperatively for further out-patient treatment under the neuropathologist's supervision.
A 51-year-old male presented to the emergency department 4 h after falling oﬀ a pushbike onto his right side at 20 km/h.
He presented to hospital after initially returning home for a brief period, where he reported symptoms of dizziness and nausea and noticed increased swelling to of right side of his abdomen.
Primary assessment was signiﬁcant for blood pressure of 75/48 mmHg (heart rate 86 bpm), which improved to 105/67 with 1 L intravenous 0.9% saline.
Focused abdominal ultrasound showed free ﬂuid in right upper quadrant.
Secondary survey identiﬁed right chest wall tenderness, right upper quadrant tenderness and distension, and grazes on the abdomen.
He proceeded to contrast enhanced computer tomography (CT) that demonstrated haemoperitoneum, grade II splenic laceration [2], right sixth to eighth rib fractures, and right transverse process fracture of the ﬁrst lumbar vertebra (Fig. 1).
The patient underwent an emergency trauma laparotomy, that revealed one litre haemoperitoneum, perforated gallbladder with free gallbladder calculi, grade I duodenal haematoma and a grade II splenic laceration.
The bleeding was from the gallbladder mucosa and peritoneal covering; the duodenal and splenic injuries were not bleeding.
His gallbladder was resected (Fig. 2), and calculi retrieved.
His gallbladder appeared ﬁbrosed, as conﬁrmed on histopathology that showed ﬁbrosis.
The duodenum and spleen were managed conservatively.
He had an uncomplicated recovery post-operatively, with conservative management of the rib and vertebral fractures, and was discharged home seven days later.
A 20-year-old male came to emergency room of our hospital with a history of an accidental multiorgan electrocution injury while passing across the road.
According to the statements of eyewitness, accidentally he was contacted with a blasted high-voltage electrical transformer while he was passing across the road, lost his consciousness, felt on ground and immediately, immediately admitted in hospital.
After shifting to ICU, his consciousness returned to normal level, pulse rate was 88 beats/min, blood pressure was 90/60 mmHg, temperature was 99 °F, Glasgow coma scale (GCS) score was E3 V5 M6 and SpO2 was 94% with 2 L of supplemental oxygen.
There was no sign of burn.
Entry and exit point of electrocution in the body was absent.
He complained his neck pain and his neck movement was restricted in all directions.
No focal neurological deﬁcit was found.
Computed tomography (CT) scan of cervical vertebrae revealed two fractures (one fracture in the anterior arch and another fracture in the posterior arch) in the arches of atlas also called, ﬁrst cervical vertebrae (C1) (Fig. 1).
CT scan of brain showed right cerebellar hemorrhage (Fig. 2).
Immobilization of neck was done with Philadelphia collar.
CT scan of chest revealed focal consolidation with pulmonary inﬁltrates in both lungs (Fig. 3).
His troponin I was 1.12 ng/mL and echo cardiogram showed no regional wall motion abnormality and ejection fraction was 55%.
After three days of treatment in ICU, his physical conditions improved and discharged to home with Philadelphia collar, and after 6 weeks, his fractures in C1 were completely healed.
A 17-year-old female with history of a motorcycle accident was referred to our hospital after diagnosing with right knee dislocation and reduction at a regional trauma center.
Physical examination revealed swelling and tenderness of the right middle tibia and right knee.
Gross deformity of the right calf was identiﬁed.
The tibial and knee injuries were closed and there was no vascular deﬁcit of the extremity shown by computed tomographic angiography (CTA).
Anterior drawer, posterior drawer, ﬂoating patella, medial stress and Lachman test were positive.
Plain radiograph and computed tomography (CT) scanning of the right knee revealed Hoﬀa fracture of the medial femoral condyle and multiple site fractures including tibial midshaft, tibial plateau, proximal ﬁbula and inferior pole patella (Fig. 1).
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) further conﬁrmed multiple ligament avulsion injuries of the ACL, PCL and MCL.
The surgery was scheduled 5 days after admission.
The reduction and ﬁxation of the midshaft tibial fracture was achieved by minimally invasive plate osteosynthesis (MIPO) technique.
The displaced tibial plateau fragment which includes the entire ACL attachment was found incarcerated in the medial Hoﬀa fracture.
The fragment was then reduced and ﬁxed with two 1.2-mm Kirschner pins paralleling the articular surface and a 4.0-mm cannulated lag screw.
A PCL tibial drill guide (Smith & Nephew Endoscopy, Andover, MA) was used to establish two bone tunnels with 2.0-mm Kirschner pins to the medial and lateral border of the PCL tibial avulsion site.
Two MB66 sutures (Ethicon, Somerville, NJ) were shuttled through the tibial tunnels by No.
2 polydioxanone (PDS) (Ethicon) guide sutures in a crossover conﬁguration.
The PCL avulsed fragment was reduced by pulling tightly each end of the MB66 sutures and tied over the anteromedial cortex of the tibia with the knee at 90° of ﬂexion.
Next, two Kirschner wires were used to provisionally stabilize the Hoﬀa fracture, followed by two 6.5-mm cannulated lag screws placed from anterior to posterior for ﬁxation.
The MCL femoral avulsion fracture was subsequently reduced and ﬁxed with a 4.0-mm cannulated screw padded with washer (Fig. 2).
The knee joint was examined to be stable intraoperatively.
The patient was immobilized in full-extension using a knee brace with cotton pad protecting the PCL.
Quadriceps strengthening, isometric exercises, controlled knee range of motion and straight-leg raises were started postoperatively.
The patient was allowed partial weight-bearing using axillary crutches at week 4.
At 6 months follow-up, the patient had no pain in her right knee.
Plain radiograph revealed union of all the fractures.
However, the ﬂexion of the knee was limited to 45°.
Arthroscopic adhesiolysis was subsequently performed and the internal ﬁxation of the knee fractures was removed (Fig. 3).
The patient was immediately allowed active and passive knee movement after surgery.
Tibial fracture ﬁxation was removed 1 year after the index surgery (Fig. 4).
At the ﬁnal follow-up (24 months), the patient's right knee achieved a full range of motion and she returned to preinjury level of activities.
The preoperative Lysholm score (37), International Knee Documentation Committee (IKDC) score (40) and Tegner score (2) improved to 92, 85 and 8 at last follow-up, respectively.
We report a rare case of a right orbital roof blow-in fracture in a 40-year-old male with concomitant basal skull fracture and intracranial hemorrhage after a fall backward.
Trauma, neurosurgery, ophthalmology, and maxillofacial surgery consultations were obtained.
Conservative, non-surgical management was recommended for all injuries, and outpatient follow up for orbital fracture with no surgery oﬀered.
A 40-year-old male presented to the emergency department via EMS with hypothermia, soft tissue swelling of the posterior head, and bilateral peri-orbital ecchymosis and edema after being found down on a cement walkway.
He was found on his back at the bottom of a short set of steps.
Initial examination revealed “raccoon eyes,” bilateral periorbital edema and ecchymosis, but no abrasion, laceration or other sign of direct trauma to the face [1].
Glasgow coma score was 14, and no neurological deﬁcit was appreciated.
The patient was intoxicated at time of presentation, blood alcohol level 0.31 g/dL, however he denied striking his face, and recalled falling backward.
There were no ﬁeld of gaze deﬁcits, no pain associated with eye movement, no gross disparity in globe size on secondary survey.
Trauma surgery and neurosurgery consultations were obtained following completion of imaging.
Transfer to a tertiary care center with ophthalmology and maxillofacial surgery was recommended and performed for management of orbital fractures per recommendation of trauma team.
Conservative, non-surgical management was recommended for all injuries, and outpatient follow up at time of discharge for orbital fractures.
The patient's hospital course was complicated by alcohol withdraw and Clostridium diﬃcile colitis.
He was discharged to a skilled nursing facility on hospital day seventeen.
Noncontrast computed tomography scan (CT) of the head demonstrated contiguous, non-displaced skull fractures involving the left occipital bone, right parietal bone, right temporal bone and extending through the right mastoid/middle ear with extensive intracranial hematomas overlying the superior frontal and parietal convexities (Fig. 1).
In addition, there were noted subarachnoid hemorrhages within the basal and prepontine cisterns, and scattered pneumocephalus (Fig. 2).
CT scan of the head and maxillofacial structures was obtained and compared with a study from ﬁve days prior (Fig. 3).
Dedicated maxillofacial CT scan demonstrated acute, isolated blow-in fracture of the posterior roof of the right orbit and non-displaced fracture of the left orbital roof with accompanying orbital hematomas (Fig. 4).
The zygomatic arches, pterygoid plates and temporomandibular joints were all intact.
A 57-year old male was admitted to the surgical casualty ward with severe lower abdominal pain and high fever of 7 days in duration.
His history indicated an incident of blunt trauma to lower abdomen whilst driving a motorised trishaw.
This incident had taken place 10 days prior to the admission to the hospital.
His lower abdomen had been compressed by the handlebar of the trishaw and he was admitted to emergency department of the local hospital.
Chest and pelvic X-rays and FAST (focused abdominal sonography for trauma) scan were done and the patient was discharged with analgesics as investigations indicated that he was clinically normal.
Patient was asymptomatic for 2 days and then on the third day, he developed abdominal pain and fever.
He was readmitted to the local hospital on day 4 and was investigated for abdominal pain.
On the 7th day, he developed absolute constipation, vomiting and high fever and was transferred to the national hospital for further management and investigation.
Upon admission, the patient had fever with chills and persistent vomiting.
The patient was in septic shock and abdominal examination revealed a distinctive palpable mass in right lower quadrant.
Patient was resuscitated with Intravenous (IV) ﬂuids and IV antibiotics were started.
Routine blood samples were drawn, which revealed signs of infection.
The blood counts during the initial investigations are given:  White blood cells: 33.4 ∗ 103/mm3 C-reactive protein: 93.7 mg/l Deranged serum creatinine: 163 micromol/l Clotting proﬁle: INR-1.6 Abdominal X-rays showed multiple dilated small bowel loops and contrast enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen, revealed an ileal transection proximal to the ileocaecal junction with faecal collection (Fig. 1).
An Emergency Laparotomy was performed and an isolated ileal segment of 15 cm was found adherent to peritoneal surface of anterior abdominal wall.
This segment was detached from the ileum, 12 cm proximal to the ileocaecal junction.
There was an omental mass covered with faeces with impending entero-cutaneous ﬁstula formation to anterior abdominal wall.
The rest of the peritoneal cavity showed minimal faecal contamination.
The diseased segment removed and a double barrel ileostomy was made after thorough peritoneal lavage.
The patient recovered without signiﬁcant morbidity and was discharged (How many days after? Its more comprehensive if this is mentioned).
He was then readmitted six weeks later for ileostomy reversal and was discharged after full recovery.
A 26 year-old female involved in a head on motor vehicle collision as a restrained front seat passenger presented to our emergency department approximately 14 h after the incident complaining of severe abdominal pain, neck pain, chest pain, and shortness of breath.
The car was travelling at moderate speed (50–60 mph) at the time of the crash.
After the collision, the patient got out of the car independently, went home and slept.
Hours later, she woke up with severe abdominal pain and presented to our emergency department.
She had two episodes of non-bilious, non-bloody vomiting.
There was no history of loss of consciousness.
Social history was positive for drug use with suspicion for alcohol ingestion prior to the crash, however, a blood alcohol level was not assessed.
On examination, the patient was anxious and diaphoretic.
Vital signs revealed tachycardia at 100 beats/min., but were otherwise normal.
GCS score was 15/15 with no sensory or motor deﬁcits.
Abdominal examination revealed a contusion to the mid-epigastric area, and severe diffuse tenderness with rebound and guarding especially in the epigastric area and left upper quadrant.
Head and neck examination revealed midline neck tenderness, but no obvious facial trauma.
Chest examination revealed right sided tenderness with ecchymosis under the right breast, and breath sounds were normal bilaterally.
Laboratory investigations revealed a white cell count of 12,900/mm3, haemoglobin level of 17.1 g/dL, amylase of 231, lipase of 80, and normal transaminases.
Plain X-rays of the chest were negative.
CT of the head and neck were negative.
CT of the abdomen and pelvis was performed and revealed large amount of free ﬂuid in the abdomen and pelvis.
The density of the ﬂuid was not suggestive of blood with an attenuation coefﬁcient of 40HU.
There was no visceral injury detected and the ﬂuid source was unclear at this point.
Diagnostic laparoscopy was performed to assess the nature of the ﬂuid and revealed a large amount of old blood in all gutters.
Conversion to open laparotomy was undertaken and all gutters were packed.
The small bowel was eviscerated to assess for injury and was found to be completely transected with underlying mesenteric injury at the level of the proximal jejunum.
No other injuries were found.
Primary repair of the jejunal transection with side-to-side anastomosis was performed with repair of the mesenteric defect.
Upon revision of the CT images postoperatively, the two ends of the transected jejunum, initially overlooked, were identiﬁed.
The postoperative course was uneventful.
The patient was discharged on postoperative day six and is doing well.
A 22 year old male was presented to the emergency department after being found down on the road.
The time from injury to the arrival of ﬁrst responders was unknown.
His Glasgow coma score (GCS) on scene was noted to be 8; with localization of the left arm to central stimulus, incomprehensible vocal sounds, and failure to open his eyes.
We stabilized his vital signs, with no signs of hypotension or hypoxia.
It was noted that he had signiﬁcant external trauma to the face and left occiput, with scalp lacerations and arterial bleeding from the left external auditory canal (EAC).
He was transferred to the local trauma center for evaluation.
Upon arrival to the emergency department his GCS dropped over a period of 10 min to 4, with extensor posturing of the left side.
His left pupil also became ﬁxed and dilated at 8 mm.
Mannitol 40 g intravenously (IV) was administered.
He was subsequently intubated and sent for computed tomography (CT) of the brain.
The non-contrast CT of the brain demonstrated a large left extra-axial hyperacute hematoma, consistent with an EDH, with signiﬁcant midline shift and uncal herniation (Fig. 1).
In addition, the CT scan displayed a severely displaced transversely oriented fracture to the petrous temporal bone (Fig. 2A, B, and C), extending into the carotid canal (Fig. 2D, arrow).
Concerns of both injuries to the junction of the transverse-sigmoid sinus and the petrous ICA were raised.
Arterial blood continued to drain from the left EAC.
After completion of the CT brain, his examination deteriorated to become bilaterally ﬁxed and dilated.
His brainstem reﬂexes were completely absent at this point, and he was not triggering the ventilator.
His pCO2 was reduced to 25 mm Hg and he was administered 60 g of mannitol, followed by 140 mL of 7.33% saline on his way to the operating room.
Given the speed of decline, we were unable to perform CT angiography to conﬁrm suspected venous sinus or petrous ICA injuries.
Under general anesthesia, a large trauma musculocutaneous ﬂap was raised, starting from 1 cm anterior to the tragus and continuing in a “question mark” shape to include the frontal/temporal/parietal regions of the calvarium.
This ﬂap was elevated anteriorly until the keyhole was identiﬁed.
Similarly, the ﬂap was opened inferiorly to expose the entire root of the zygoma.
The temporalis muscle was dissected off from the fractured fragments of the calvarium.
At this point a large amount of venous hemorrhage was encountered near the ﬂoor of the middle fossa, which was packed with gel foam.
The fracture fragments over the lateral cortical surface were removed, and the high speed drill was utilized to complete a large craniectomy, exposing all of the frontal, temporal and parietal lobes of the left hemisphere.
A subtemporal decompression was performed with rongeurs.
The EDH was evacuated, revealing a large dural laceration to the cortical surface, measuring 8 cm by 6 cm overlying the peri-Rolandic area.
Hemostasis of this cortical injury was obtained with bipolar electrocautery.
Ongoing brisk venous sinus bleeding was seen from the area of the temporal fracture extending into the asterion.
The injury was inaccessible for primary repair.
Attempts at packing the area failed as the pressure required for packing led to diastases of the transverse petrous fracture and subsequent arterial bleeding from deep within the fracture line.
This likely represented the bleeding from the petrous ICA.
The lateral portion of the entire temporal bone became free ﬂoating from the remainder of the skull base.
The overall blood loss at this point was approximately 4 L from both the venous sinus and petrous ICA injuries.
Ongoing transfusion occurred throughout the case, without any episodes of hypotension or hypoxemia.
Given the difﬁculties with controlling the hemorrhage from these two inaccessible sites, it was elected to perform a manual reduction of the petrous temporal bone fracture, followed by lateral plating, in order to aid with packing of the sinus injury and tamponade of the suspected petrous ICA injury.
Medially directed pressure was applied at the level of the EAC with a gloved open palm, leading the reduction of the fracture diastases in the petrous temporal bone.
We were able to completely reduce the fracture fragments, which were initially separated approximately 10–15 mm.
Throughout this maneuver we ensured that the medial pressure was as co-axial as possible, so as to prevent any further shear injury to the venous sinus and petrous carotid artery during the reduction attempt.
Hemorrhage from both the venous sinus and petrous carotid artery decreased dramatically with this maneuver.
Short titanium plates were applied across the fracture lines, both anterior and posterior, and secured with 4 mm screws.
Fixation via titanium plates and screws occurred speciﬁcally across the spheno–squamousal suture line anterior-inferiorly via two separate plates, and also along the mastoid–occipital suture line posterior-inferiorly utilizing a single plate.
The bleeding at this point decreased signiﬁcantly, with cessation of the arterial hemorrhage deep within the temporal bone.
The plating can be seen in Fig. 3.
The residual bleeding from the venous sinus injury was subsequently packed with gel foam without difﬁculty.
Unfortunately at this point, the entire left hemisphere appeared quite swollen and ischemic (likely from an ICA injury).
An intra-parenchymal strain gage intracranial pressure (ICP) monitor was placed and the wound was closed, leaving the bone off.
The patient was subsequently transferred to ICU.
Upon arrival in ICU, the ICP was ranging from 40 to 60 mm Hg despite maximal medical therapy.
Over the course of the following 6 h the patient developed diabetes insipidus.
A CT scan of the brain demonstrated signiﬁcant left hemispheric ischemia, contralateral hemispheric injuries, and suspected injury to the mesencephalon and pons (Fig. 4).
It was elected to withdrawal care.
The patient died 6 h after the surgery was completed.
A 79-year-old Caucasian woman was referred to our Level-I trauma center for management of multiple injuries following an MVC that occurred an hour before presentation.
Medical history was signiﬁcant for atrial ﬁbrillation, hypertension, coronary artery disease, and hyperlipidemia.
Before arrival at our center, initial evaluation at an outside hospital noted bilateral pneumothoraces, closed fractures involving multiple ribs and the proximal femur on the right, abrasions with ecchymosis and a left renal laceration.
Despite aggressive resuscitation, the systolic blood pressure (SBP) and Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score dropped to 90 mmHg and 14, respectively, which led to transfer to our center for higher care.
Upon arrival at our center (2 h after MVC, which includes a 15-minute transit time), no change was noted in her orientation (GCS still 14).
Ongoing blood transfusions initiated at the referring hospital stabilized her BP at 95/70 mmHg, heart rate (HR) at 99 beats/ min, respiratory rate (RR) 24 cycles/min, with 100% oxygen saturation (SpO2).
Primary trauma survey noted intact airway, breathing and circulation, and routine labs were ordered.
Cranial/cervical spinal injuries were ruled out.
The patient was neuro-vascularly intact.
Ten minutes since arrival, rapid sequence intubation with etomidate and rocuronium was performed.
Drop-in BP (64/38 mmHg), and HR (83 beats/min) occurred.
Out of concern that the previously inserted right-sided chest tube was now nonfunctional, a second chest tube was secured ipsilaterally that resulted in an immediate rush of air and prompt drainage of 50 cc of blood.
The patient remained hypotensive as IV ﬂuid bolus and transfusion of red cells continued.
Five-minutes following chest tube insertion, the patient was noted to have pulseless electrical activity (PEA).
Resuscitation, according to Advanced Cardiac Life Support (ACLS) guidelines, was initiated.
After the initial 1-mg IV epinephrine, she developed ventricular ﬁbrillation.
Despite continued resuscitation efforts, the patient remained in PEA.
Focused echocardiography conﬁrmed no cardiac activity.
Resuscitation efforts stopped after a total of 9 min.
Five-minutes after termination, a repeat echocardiogram also noted no cardiac activity, and the family was informed of the patient's demise.
Approximately nine-minutes after cessation of resuscitation, while performing post-mortem care, a registered nurse noted respiratory eﬀorts, heard air movement through the now detached end of the endotracheal tube, and felt a strong radial pulse [HR 132 beats/min; BP 142/79 mmHg].
Her family was informed about the ROSC.
Ten-minutes later, BP and HR decreased to 100/53 mmHg and 100beats/min, respectively.
A peripheral epinephrine drip was initiated at 0.03 μg/kg/min.
Twenty-minutes following ROSC, BP fell to 83/40 mmHg and heart rate remained constant at 100beats/min.
With a bolus of normal saline and an epinephrine drip, a rebound increase in BP (130/77 mmHg) was observed.
The patient continued to remain hemodynamically unstable.
Four-hours after ROSC, a pre-emptive selective coiling and arterial gel-foam embolization of the inferior renal pole, for a concerning local hematoma producing a tamponade eﬀect, was performed.
Resuscitation attempts continued.
The INR improved from over 23 to 6.76.
Acidosis continued to worsen with pH dropping to 7.12 before rebounding back to 7.2 again.
By this time, 5 units of PRBCs, 4 units of FFP, 2 platelets concentrate, and 2 l of IV ﬂuids were transfused.
Her GCS continued to remain at 3 T with no observable neurological function including negative corneal reﬂexes.
Ten-hours post auto-resuscitation, the patient developed asystole.
The patient's family opted to not resuscitate, and the patient died.
A 31-year old male patient was transferred to our trauma center following a high speed road traffic accident.
He was riding a motorcycle and crashed into a car.
He was retrieved to our trauma center hours later the accident from a primary hospital.
Primary survey revealed a hemodynamically stable patient, a Glasgow coma score of 15 points and a right pneumothorax with a tube.
The left lower extremity was shortened and in internal rotation position.
There was damage to the sciatic nerve with motor and sensitive compromise (Fig. 1a).
Trauma series CT revealed cerebral contusion, subdural hematoma, aortic dissection and a left transverse plus posterior wall acetabular fracture.
The patient underwent vascular surgery with an aortic endoprosthesis.
After vascular surgery, the left hip was reduced under general anesthesia (Fig. 1b).
The pelvic X-ray evidenced signs of acetabular retroversion with positive posterior wall sign and crossover sign (Fig. 2).
CT scan evidenced increased alpha angle in the femoral head neck junction (CAM).
Nine days later, the acetabular fracture was treated with a Kocher Langenbeck approach in prone position.
The transverse pattern was reduced and ﬁxed with a 7.0 mm cannulated screw and the posterior wall was reduced and ﬁxed with a 5 holes and 7 holes plates.
Anatomical reduction was obtained (Fig. 1c).
Postoperatively, physiotherapy was with passive exercises and progression to transfer to a wheelchair.
Weight bearing was restricted.
The patient was instructed to avoid hip ﬂexion and internal rotation because of his poor acetabular posterior wall coverage.
During the follow up, 2 months after the acetabular ﬁxation, during sleeping, patient suffered a posterior left hip dislocation (Fig. 3).
Six days later a total cementless hip arthroplasty was performed (Fig. 4).
He was allowed to partial weight bearing on his left side with two crutches for 6 weeks progressing to full weight bearing at eight weeks without crutches.
A healthy 52 year old male presented to our level one trauma centre (L1TC) via ambulance approximately 30 min after sustaining an MVC with signiﬁcant impact.
On arrival in the trauma bay he was awake and oriented with a GCS of 15.
He had good airway entry bilaterally, with a seatbelt sign tracking across his left neck, chest and abdomen.
He was tachycardic (heart rate of 120 bpm), but responsive to a minimal ﬂuid challenge.
Focussed assessment with sonography for trauma (FAST) scan was positive in Morrison's pouch and the rectovesical pouch.
A CT scan demonstrated active contrast extravasation from the small bowel mesentery with moderate hemoperitoneum and a portion of proximal small bowel with diﬀerential enhancement suggestive of edema, without free air.
There was also an acute left lateral abdmoinal wall hernia, and a contained right renal injury, with no intra-peritoneal solid organ injuries.
Additional orthopedic injuries were noted.
Given a transient response to ﬂuid challenge, with active extravasation on CT scan and abdominal tenderness, the patient was brought to the OR for urgent laparotomy.
In the OR, 4 L of hemoperitoneum were evacuated and the mesenteric hemorrhage was identiﬁed at the distal ileum and controlled with clips.
At this site, there was a complete transection of the distal ileum, 15 cm proximal to the ileocecal valve.
There were 2 additional small bowel antimesenteric blowout injuries identiﬁed, and a bucket-handle injury involving 15 cm of proximal ileum (Fig. 1A).
Within the colon, we identiﬁed a serosal injury with bruising at the distal sigmoid which, upon mobilization, revealed a 10 cm bucket-handle injury just proximal to the rectosigmoid junction.
The traumatic ﬂank hernia seen on CT contained this portion of the sigmoid colon.
The patient's stability allowed for resection and successful primary anastomosis of all hollow viscus injuries.
A healthy 56 year old female, with a history of Roux-en-Y gastric bypass for obesity, was transferred to our L1TC from a community hospital several hours post MVC, with hypotension (95/50 mm Hg) and abdominal pain.
Her examination revealed multiple bruises over her face and a seatbelt sign over her chest and abdomen.
A CT scan identiﬁed a traumatic right ﬂank hernia containing small bowel and ﬂuid, with only trace intra-abdominal free ﬂuid.
There was no free air or evidence of any solid organ injury.
Additional orthopedic injuries were identiﬁed as well.
Despite her relative stability, she was taken to the OR for exploratory laparoscopy due to abdominal pain out of proportion with her assessment.
In the OR, an initial laparoscopic reduction of the distal small bowel from the hernia revealed a bucket handle injury with bowel ischemia precipitating a laparotomy (Fig. 1B).
Overall, a total of 160 cm of proximal to mid-jejunum was noted to be ischemic and thus resected with primary anastomosis.
Along with this, a primary tissue closure of the right ﬂank hernia was performed.
No other abdominal injuries were identiﬁed.
A 54 years old patient, with no signiﬁcant pathological history, was admitted to the digestive and general surgery department for right thoraco-abdominal stab wound.
At physical examination, there was a 1 cm linear sub-xiphoid wound, with clear shores, bleeding, with a subcutaneous hematoma.
Blood pressure was 130/80 mm Hg, the heart rate measured to be 82 bpm and blood oxygen saturation was of 98%.
The abdomen was checked to be soft with a sensitivity of the right hypochondrium.
Blood count showed a haemoglobin at 12.3 g/dL.
A chest X-ray showed no rind or pleural effusion.
Then an abdominal CT scan was performed, which demonstrated a deep hepatic laceration of segments IV, V and VIII of the liver without extravasation of the contrast medium (Fig. 1).
There were no other associated lesions.
Owing to the hemodynamic stability and the absence of peritoneal signs, a non-operative treatment was advised.
Clinical status of the patient remained stable.
Haemoglobin levels remained correct.
On day 12 post traumatic, the patient complained of pain of the right hypochondrium with fever at 38.5 °C.
There was hyperleukocytosis at 23,000 cell/mm3.
Hepatic CT angiography showed a pseudo aneurysm of the right hepatic artery with an opaciﬁcation of the right hepatic vein in the early arterial phase (Fig. 2).
Vascular reconstruction from the CT angio-scan showed a communication between the right branch of the hepatic artery and the right hepatic vein (Fig. 3).
The treatment consisted of a selective radiological embolization of the branch of the right hepatic artery, site of the ﬁstula.
The arteriography showed a complete disappearance of the extravasation of contrast media after embolization and coils in place (Fig. 4).
A checkup performed with an angioscanner at day 3 post-embolization, showed the absence of opaciﬁcation of the right hepatic vein during the arterial phase.
The patient had no complains with a decline of 3 months.
A 50-year-old male presented with a painless and well-deﬁned nodule covered by intact mucosa in the anterior maxillary vestibule, midline region; extending to the upper lip mucosa of at least 2-year duration (Fig. 1).
The patient stated some episodes of rupture and recurrence of the lesion with discharge of some ﬂuid.
His past medical history was insigniﬁcant.
A tooth-related inﬂammatory process, nasolabial cyst, and a benign salivary gland-related process such as salivary duct cyst and cystadenoma were considered as diﬀerential diagnosis.
Through intra-oral examination, maxillary central incisors were found vital using vitality test and no tooth caries or ﬁlling was noted.
Radiographically, a well-deﬁned, and metal-like radiopaque object in the anterior maxilla was observed (Fig. 2).
Therefore, a working diagnosis of foreign body reaction was made.
Under local anesthesia, a muco-periosteal ﬂap was performed and after reﬂection of the ﬂap, the lesion was found completely in the soft tissue and the underlying bone was intact without involvement.
The lesion appeared as a cyst-like structure grossly, containing amber-colored ﬂuid.
After drainage the ﬂuid, the nodule was completely excised.
The specimen was placed in 10% buﬀered formalin solution and submitted for histopathologic studies.
Grossly, the specimen demonstrated partially ruptured, cyst-like features, with a thick wall measuring 1.2 cm.
A dark silver gray metal object measuring 0.5 cm with corroded surface was retrieved from the specimen (Fig. 3a).
Histopathologically, a cyst-like structure with an inﬂamed thick ﬁbrous wall was noted.
No epithelial lining was evident, and the luminal surface of the specimen exhibited synovial metaplasia-like change predominantly composed of eosinophilic epithelioid cells with distinct cytoplasmic border intermixed with ﬁbroblast-like cells.
A patchy lymphohistiocytic inﬁltrate and hemorrhage were also seen throughout the ﬁbrous wall (Figs. 3b and 3c).
Immunohistochemically, CD163 highlighted the histiocytes (Fig. 3d).
Using polarized light, scattered refractile particulate foreign material was found both in the cystic space and in the ﬁbrous wall.
Collectively, a diagnosis of foreign material and associated cyst-like foreign body granulomatous reaction was made.
Considering the patient's history of an injury caused by the explosion took place in the Iran-Iraq war in 30 years ago and history of some surgical attempts for removing some shrapnel from his body, the source of that foreign object was suggested.
Post-operatively, in a 4-year clinical follow up, the patient showed no evidence of infection and recurrence.
A 46-year-old-man presented with a 1-day history of sudden abdominal pain.
In the 4 h preceding admission, abdominal pain increased, with an onset of left chest pain and dyspnea.
A right-sided thoracotomy had been performed for chest trauma 2 years previously.
There were decreased breath sounds on the left side.
Chest radiography showed left diaphragm elevation, and ﬂuid with a stepladder pattern within the loops of the bowel (Fig. 1).
Computed tomography (CT) of the chest revealed air-ﬁlled bowel in the left thorax, accompanied by pleural effusion (Fig. 2A, B).
The patient was taken to the operating room immediately and thoracotomy was performed under general anesthesia.
We found a 50-cm proximal segment of jejunal loop parasternal into the left thoracic cavity.
The jejunum was black in color and there was an absence of bowel peristalsis.
We judged necrosis to be present (Fig. 3), and repaired the diaphragm and removed the necrotic jejunum.
The patient made a full recovery.
A 28-year-old otherwise healthy male sustained two stab wounds to the right chest.
The Care Flight Rapid Response Helicopter (CRRH) staﬀed by a retrieval physician and advanced care paramedic was airborne 3 min after notiﬁcation.
The Team was at the patient 21 min later.
At initial assessment the patient was pale and diaphoretic.
A systolic blood pressure (BP) of 70 mmHg, heart rate (HR) 136, respiratory rate (RR) of 30, SpO2 of 100% on room air and Glasgow coma scale (GCS) of 14.
Intravenous (IV) access obtained.
The physician performed an extended focused assessment with sonography for trauma (EFAST).
A large pericardial eﬀusion was observed with features of tamponade including right ventricular systolic collapse, right atrial diastolic collapse and a distended inferior vena cava (IVC).
A decision was made to transport immediately by air (see also Fig. 1).
The team departed with patient 17 min after arrival.
1 unit of red cell concentrate (RCC) and 500 mL of crystalloid were administered.
The receiving Major Trauma Centre was advised of the EFAST ﬁndings.
The receiving Cardiothoracic Service and Operating Theatre (OT) were prepared for patient arrival.
The local Massive Transfusion Protocol (MTP) was activated.
During ﬂight a further 120 mL RCC was transfused and the patient received 1 g of IV Tranexamic Acid (TXA).
After a 20 min ﬂight the patient was met on the helipad by the Trauma Team Leader and transported directly to the OT.
He arrived in theatre 37 min after patient contact with Retrieval team from a distance of 84 km by direct ﬂight.
Emergency Sternotomy and mini thoracotomy revealed a left lower chest wound penetrating the chest wall with entry into the LV myocardium and a ﬁve millimetre wound lateral and distal to the Left Anterior Descending Coronary Artery with active bleeding.
There was also a 500 mL haemothorax in the left thoracic cavity.
These injuries were surgically repaired.
The patient was extubated immediately post operatively, discharged from intensive care the following day, and made a full recovery.
A 52-year-old otherwise healthy male received two stab wounds to the chest and a laceration to his left wrist.
The CRRH was airborne three minutes after tasking and arrived at the patient 29 min later.
A road EMS crew had already obtained IV access, performed needle decompression of the left hemi thorax and administered oxygen after ﬁnding the patient was agitated with SpO2 of 80%.
Upon arrival of the CRRH team, the patient had SpO2 of 99% on 15 l via non-rebreather mask, a systolic BP of 82 mmHg, HR of 115, RR of 15, and GCS of 10.
The physician performed an EFAST, identifying a large pericardial eﬀusion with features of tamponade and a large left haemopneumothorax.
1 unit RCC and 500 mL of compound sodium lactate were infused, followed by rapid sequence intubation (RSI), left thoracostomy and pleural drain insertion.
After 30 min on scene, the retrieval team transferred the patient, administering TXA 1 g in ﬂight, three units of RCC and a further 1000 mL of compound sodium lactate to maintain systolic BP between 70 and 80 mmHg.
Flight time was 16 min to travel 75 km.
The hospital was notiﬁed of EFAST ﬁndings and patient condition during ﬂight and Cardiothoracic Surgery team and the OT were activated.
The retrieval team was met on the helipad by the Trauma Team with a further 2 units RCC.
The patient proceeded directly to the OT and arrived there 66 min following initial patient contact.
At left thoracotomy a profusely bleeding left internal mammary artery was revealed.
The patient had a laceration to the left lower lobe of the lung that went through pericardium and penetrated the left ventricle.
The patient remained intubated post operatively and underwent surgery the following day for removal of thoracic packs and deﬁnitive closure of his chest.
He was extubated 2 days after injury, discharged from ICU a day later, and made a full recovery.
A 61-year-old female with no signiﬁcant past medical history presented to an another hospital after she was the restrained driver in a motor vehicle collision.
She complained of mild to moderate sharp pain in her left chest and hip, as well as shortness of breath.
On exam she demonstrated stable vital signs, regular rate and had left rib tenderness and left pelvic and sacral tenderness.
Evaluation, including pan CT scanning, revealed fractures of the left sacral ala and left superior and inferior pubic rami.
Her injuries were deemed non-operative and she was admitted for pain control and physical therapy for 4 days, and then discharged home.
One month after discharge she re-presented with worsening left chest pain, shortness of breath, dizziness and fatigue.
New imaging revealed an anterior diaphragmatic rupture with herniation of transverse colon and omentum into the left hemithorax with mass eﬀect on the anterior heart (Fig. 1), a moderate to large layering left pleural eﬀusion with near complete atelectasis of the left lower lobe and a subacute minimally displaced manubrium fracture.
She was transferred to our hospital, for further management.
Upon arrival to our hospital she was tachycardic and diaphoretic with decreased left breath sounds and left upper quadrant tenderness.
We opted to take her emergently to the operating room for operative reduction of the hernia and repair of diaphragmatic defect.
At exploration, the entire transverse colon and omentum were eviscerated through a large defect in the anterior portion of her diaphragm and into her pericardium.
The undamaged heart was visible through the defect.
There was also a lateral pericardial defect, through which the hernia contents traveled out of the pericardium and further into the left chest.
We were able to easily reduce the hernia contents, the transverse colon and omentum.
We repaired the open pericardial and diaphragmatic defect and were able to achieve good tension-free approximation.
There were no other injuries.
Postoperatively she had intermittent episodes of atrial ﬁbrillation, which was controlled with low dose metoprolol.
She was discharged to home on postoperative day 5 on metoprolol, without complications.
A 16 year old male fell down while cycling and was brought to the trauma centre after 4 h with closed injury to his left upper limb.
On clinical examination, there was abnormal mobility and crepitus in his left forearm and elbow appeared dislocated.
Radial pulse was palpable and there was no neurological deficit.
Radiographs showed a transcondylar fracture dislocation (posadas fracture) with fracture line extending into the articular surface of lateral condyle and associated radius fracture and segmental ulna fracture (Figs. 1-2).
Patient was taken to operating room and the fracture site was exposed through posterior triceps elevating approach.
Anatomical reduction of articular fragments was achieved and stabilised with bicolumnar plating.
Elbow was grossly unstable with avulsion of both medial and lateral collateral ligaments from the humeral side and avulsion of anterior capsule from the coronoid.
Both medial and lateral collateral ligaments were repaired with transosseous suturing technique and anterior capsule was reattached with the help of lasso sutures.
No.2 non absorbable sutures were used for the repair of both collateral ligaments and anterior capsule.
After the repair of ligaments and capsule , elbow was stable and wound was closed in layers.
Posterior splint was given with elbow in 90 degree of flexion and mid prone position.
After subsidance of swelling, the forearm fractures were reduced and internally fixed with limited contact dynamic compression plating (Figs. 3-4).
Postoperative period was uneventful and patient was discharged after one week.
Posterior splint was removed after one week and ROM brace was applied with 30 degree extension block.
Patient was encouraged to do active ROM exercises for 4 weeks, followed by active assisted exercises for next 6 weeks under the supervision of a therapist.
Patient was serially followed up for upto 1 year and after 1 year, the patient was pain free with ROM of 0 degree to 120 degree flexion and has resumed his previous activity levels (Figs. 5-8).
A 20 year old male patient was involved in a motor vehicle accident, driving at a speed of 60 km/h, with resultant severe and diffuse trauma to the abdomen, trunk and extremities.
The patient was wearing protective clothing.
He was rescued by an experienced air ambulance team and arrived at the emergency department with unstable vital signs, ﬂaccid paraplegia with a cord level at T10 and a complete loss of voluntary control over bowel and bladder function.
The FAST examination was negative.
A total body CT revealed multiple rib fractures, bilateral hemothoraces, and hemoperitoneum with AAST grade 4 splenic injury [1].
He also had left-sided renal and adrenal injury, in addition to a right-sided scapular fracture.
Spinal CT imaging showed a transdiscal AO type C fracture with bilateral facet subluxation of T11 over T12 [2].
The pneumothoraces were drained through chest tubes.
An exploratory laparotomy was performed because of hemodynamic instability, and a splenectomy was performed.
The left retroperitoneal space was packed due to the presence of a large retroperitoneal hematoma and known kidney and adrenal injuries.
“Damage Control” type surgery, without thorough exploration of the pancreas, was performed, due to the patient's compromised physiological status, and no other lesions were identiﬁed at that time.
The patient was then transferred to the Intensive Care Unit for close monitoring.
On post-admission day (PAD) 1, MRI of the spine was performed, showing the subluxation of T11 over T12, with an associated rupture of the intervertebral disc and the posterior longitudinal ligament.
In addition, it revealed a 9 mm-thick epidural hematoma overlying the posterior wall of T11, associated with a medullary contusion at the level of T11–T12 (Fig. 1B).
On PAD 2, spinal surgery was performed, with reduction of the subluxation and trans-pedicular screw ﬁxation from T9 to L2.
An intra-operative post-traumatic dural tear was suspected, because of a small leak of CSF, but no repair was attempted because of the impossibility to clearly identify the site of leakage.
The liquid was apparently clear and colourless.
On PAD 3, a planned second look laparotomy was performed and after depacking, no bleeding was observed, with persistence of the retroperitoneal hematoma.
A small amount of turbid liquid was identiﬁed, but no lesions were found after inspecting the small intestine and colon.
Over the following days, the patient complained of intense back pain that was not responsive to opiates.
He experienced hallucinations, became agitated and developed a septic state.
A thoracolumbar MRI and a thoraco-abdominal CT were performed, showing large bilateral para-vertebral and retroperitoneal ﬂuid collections.
They also revealed a AAST grade 3 pancreatic injury, which was retrospectively already present on the initial CT, but not recognized at that time [3].
The patient was taken back to the operating room for revision of the thoraco-lumbar wound.
During surgery, a CSF leak from a circular dural breach at the level of the previous subluxation was identiﬁed.
The breached area was then repaired with a ﬁbrin sealant (Tisseel, Baxter International Inc.), along with debridement of necrotic tissue and drainage of newly purulent collections.
This was followed by copious irrigation with normal saline and tight closure of the facia and subcutaneous tissue.
Two Penrose drains were left in the superﬁcial layers.
The retroperitoneal ﬂuid collections were evacuated by percutaneous CT-guided placement of a drain.
The blood cultures, paravertebral and abdominal ﬂuid collections were all positive for Enterobacter cloacae.
Intravenous antibiotic treatment with Meropenem was instituted.
Despite all interventions, the paravertebral and abdominal collections increased and repeat cultures remained positive for Enterobacter cloacae.
The paravertebral collections exteriorized through the dorsal skin across three new locations other than the incision.
Serum amylase and lipase were measured high up to 3 times the standard norm from the trauma day up to 1 week, then the values returned to baseline (standard norm respectively 13–53 U/l and 13 60 U/l).
High levels of amylase (12′716 U/I) and lipase (72′610 U/I) were also found upon chemical analysis of the dorsal spinal ﬂuid collections.
In order to treat the pancreatic leak, an ERCP was performed, with placement of a stent bridging the defect of the main duct, located in the body of the pancreas (see Fig. 2).
The patient required a reoperation for debridement and drainage of the recurrent paravertebral collection and reapplication of a layer of ﬁbrin sealant over the dural breach.
The patient was initially exclusively fed by total parenteral nutrition for a period of 15 days.
Subcutanous somatostatine was introduced for a period of 7 days (0.1 mg tid), as an adjunct to proton pump inhibitors, to minimize pancreatic secretions.
A progressive enteral feeding by naso-jejunal tube in addition to parenteral alimentation was continued for 7 days.
The patient could then gradually be orally fed and enteral and parenteral nutritional intake could be weaned off.
Over the following weeks, the patient's general condition slowly improved, with progressive resolution of all ﬂuid collections on serial follow-up CT.
The drains were removed and the patient transferred to a rehabilitation facility on PAD 52, with a neurologic status of complete paraplegia and a sensory level at T10.
Antibiotic treatment was given for a total of 7 months till the CT showed complete resolution of the collections in the spinal and retroperitoneal spaces (Fig. 3B).
A 79-year-old man was brought to the emergency room for abdominal pain.
He slipped down two days prior to admission.
He complained of generalized abdominal tenderness, but no rebound tenderness.
Abdominal rigidity was noted on physical examination.
The blood pressure was 119/87 mm Hg, and pulse rate was 87 beats/min.
He was admitted 3 months prior due to multiple rib fractures with hemothorax on the right after vehicular accident, computed tomography (CT) showed no evidence of any vascular anomaly or vasculitis at that time.
Laboratory studies during the present admission showed thrombocytopenia and platelet dysfunction, due to transient bone marrow depression and chronic liver disease.
CT showed moderate amount of hemoperitoneum with suspicious contrast leakage from the left gastric artery and left gastroepiploic artery (Fig. 1A).
His hemoglobin and hematocrit levels were 7.6 g/dl and 22.1%, respectively.
Because vital sign was stable, angioembolization was planned; the angiography showed no evidence of active bleeding from the celiac trunk, gastroduodenal artery, and left gastric artery (Fig. 1B).
Conservative management, including absolute bed rest, hemostatic, agents and transfusion, was applied to keep the vital signs stable.
Follow up CT showed a 0.5 cm pseudoaneurysm of the left gastric artery and no evidence of active bleeding 4 days post-admission (6 days post-trauma) (Fig. 2A, B).
Angioembolization for the pseudoaneurysm of the left gastric artery was planned.
Angiography revealed the left gastric artery arising from the aorta.
Selective injection of the left gastric artery revealed multiple pseudoaneurysms with extravasation along the lesser curvature of the stomach (Fig. 3A).
Superselective catheterization of the vessel allowed embolization with microcoils.
Postembolization angiography revealed no further pseudoaneurysm or extravasation (Fig. 3B).
The patient was discharged 10 days at post-admission without any problems.
One month post-trauma, follow-up CT showed no evidence of contrast leakage or aneurysm of the celiac trunk and left gastric artery (Fig. 3C, D).
A 40-year-old female was referred to our center with the history of a roadside accident while she was travelling as a pillion rider on a two-wheeler vehicle hit by a car from behind.
The rider fell sideways and sustained clean cut wounds over the forearm and left knee.
The pillion rider was accelerated in the front and hit by the two-wheeler handle in the abdomen.
She complained of right upper abdominal pain and few minor abrasions over the right lower limb.
There was no complaint of vomiting, seizures, back pain or haematuria.
Her past medical history was insigniﬁcant.
On examination, patient was alert and conscious; vitals were stable, physical and systemic examinations were normal.
Routine work including hemogram, renal function test and serum electrolytes were normal.
Abdominal ultrasound showed mild free ﬂuid in pelvis.
X ray chest and right lower limb were grossly normal.
Contrast enhanced CT (Computed tomography) abdomen revealed partial thrombus of left renal vein and infra hepatic inferior vena cava thrombus (Fig. 1).
There were no collateral vessels in the adjacent surrounding area suggesting it as an acute event.
The renal artery was normal with no evidence of renal parenchymal injury.
Rest of the solid organs were grossly normal.
In view of isolated venous involvement, the conservative approach was trailed.
Patient was advised strict bed rest and vitals were monitored at frequent intervals.
Baseline prothrombin time (PT) and international normalized ratio (INR) were done and the injection Enoxaparin 0.75 mg/kg twice a day started after consultation with haematology expert.
PT and INR were monitored daily and 2 mg warfarin tablet started on day 4, overlapping with enoxaparin keeping therapeutic range of INR between 2 and 3.
Patient was discharged on day 8 and advised to follow up at regular intervals with INR.
A repeat contrast CT after 3 months showed complete resolution of thrombus (Figs. 2, 3).
Haematology review was taken and anticoagulants were continued for another 3 months and tapered gradually.
Currently, patient is asymptomatic, 8 months follow up and planned for colour Doppler imaging of renal vessels.
A 39-year-old male fell from a forklift, hit his right abdominal area hard, and suffered injuries.
Pain gradually worsened, and he was urgently transported to our hospital on the same day.
Bruises and tenderness were observed in the right back area only, and his vital signs were stable [respiratory rate was 20 breaths per minute, SpO2 was 98% (room air), blood pressure was 96/ 50 mmHg, pulse was 70 beats per minute, and awareness was 15 points according to the Glasgow coma scale].
No abnormal ﬁndings were detected on chest or pelvis X-ray.
A hematoma was revealed around the right kidney on focused assessment with sonography for trauma, so we performed contrast imaging CT.
An inferior extremity laceration of the right kidney and hematoma ﬂowing outside of Gerota's fasciae were revealed.
Consequently, the patient was diagnosed with a Grade IV laceration (American Association for the Surgery of Trauma classiﬁcation).
The volume of hemorrhage from the hematoma was relatively heavy; however, on imaging, no obvious extravasation of the contrast medium was observed in the early phase, but a delayed extravasation faintly spreading within the hematoma was observed in the delay phase.
This delayed extravasation was not considered a symptom of ureteral injury as differing from the timing of the excretory phase (Fig. 1a/b).
Angiography was performed for closure treatment.
Extravasation from the arteries was not observed in the right kidney artery on imaging (Fig. 2a); however, similar to the ﬁndings of the contrast imaging CT, slow extravasation of the contrast medium from the lacerated kidney area was observed after taking a contrast image of the renal parenchyma.
Thus, the patient was diagnosed with renal vein branch injury (Fig. 3a/b/c).
Firstly, to assist with the diagnosis of vascular injury, a transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) was performed using coils because the renal artery branch abutting the lacerated kidney area was irregularly interrupted (Fig. 2b).
As for the renal vein branch injury, TAE was performed using a gelatin sponge because extravasation of contrast medium outside of the blood vessels was conﬁrmed during the vein phase while selectively taking a contrast image of the bifurcation of the inferior renal artery corresponding to the damaged area.
After TAE, the extravasation disappeared (Fig. 3d/e/f).
Later, the ureteral stent was indwelled and conservative treatment was continued.
The patient was discharged on the 26th day of illness.
Twenty-eight-year man presented to the ED (Emergency Department) with blunt abdominal injury.
He had tied a rope around the abdomen to climb down a cliﬀ (for cutting unwanted vegetation) and ﬁxed the other end to the rear of a vehicle for suspension.
He sustained sudden pull and drag when the vehicle started and sped oﬀ by the unaware driver (Fig. 1).
The primary survey was normal except for a positive FAST examination.
Patterned abrasion of rope injury was present below the umbilicus curving posteriorly and cephalad in bilateral ﬂanks (Fig. 2A).
CECT showed pneumo-peritoneum and free ﬂuid.
Aorta, inferior vena cava, ureters, and spine were normal.
On exploration, the parietal wall was completely transected in the ﬂanks leaving only the skin intact (Fig. 2B).
Multiple transections were found in the small bowel (Fig. 2C) and seromuscular layers of ascending and descending colon with contused mucosa at the level of rope mark (Fig. 2D).
Parietal wall repair in layers, jejuno-jejunal, and colocolic anastomosis were done with protective ileostomy (Fig. 2A).
Post-operatively he developed superﬁcial surgical site infection which required removing skin sutures and was grafted after a period of dressing.
Restoration of bowel continuity was done 2 months later.
A 30-year-old male with no previous medical illness was brought to hospital several hours after a ballistic trauma: small metallic fragment impacted and embedded into the left anterolateral aspect of his neck while he was working in a factory.
There was neither respiratory nor vascular compromise.
Examination showed a 5 mm puncture wound at level 3, anterolateral aspect of the neck.
No active bleeding seen.
No foreign body palpable.
X-ray and ultrasound showed the foreign body was impacted at 1.2 cm below skin level.
Wound exploration was done under local anesthesia following the trajectory of the foreign body impaction.
No foreign body was seen despite limited exploration beyond 1.5 cm depth from skin level.
Computed Tomography (CT) was done to locate the foreign body showed it being embedded within left sternocleidomastoid (SCM) muscle, just superﬁcial to the carotid sheath (Fig. 1).
Neck wound exploration was done under general anesthesia meticulously.
Image intensiﬁer was not available due to logistic reasons.
Meticulous dissection of the muscle along the tract of the foreign body impaction was guided with rigid endoscope.
The 6 × 3 mm metal fragment was identiﬁed with rigid endoscope just short of carotid sheath and successfully removed without any complications.
A previously healthy 39-year-old male presented to the emergency department 30 min after being involved in a motor vehicle collision.
The patient was well appearing, hemodynamically stable, and alert with a Glasgow coma scale of 15.
On physical examination, the patient's abdomen was distended with left upper quadrant tenderness and bilateral ﬂank pain.
There were no signs of rebound tenderness, peritoneal irritation or left shoulder pain.
An IV contrast enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis revealed a 10.5 × 10 × 11 cm cystic lesion in the spleen with heterogeneously increased central intensity indicative of active hemorrhage (Fig. 1).
Additionally, a 7.5 cm laceration on the superior aspect of the spleen was noted with a subcapsular splenic hematoma involving more than 50% of the splenic surface suggesting a grade III splenic injury.
CT scan also revealed hyperdense ﬂuid in the left paracolic gutter indicating an intraperitoneal bleed.
Shortly after the completion of the CT scans, the patient became hypotensive and was promptly treated with and responded to 2 L LR ﬂuid-challenge resuscitation.
This was the only time that the patient's condition became unstable.
An exploratory laparotomy was performed 30 min after the time of admission and revealed a large hemoperitoneum and a ruptured splenic cyst with a structure resembling hydatid cystic membranes (Fig. 2).
No other injuries were noted or sustained by the patient.
A total splenectomy was performed and the peritoneal cavity was irrigated with cetrimide for 10 min.
Thorough exploration of the abdomen revealed no other pathology.
Post-operative pathological examination of the spleen conﬁrmed the presence of a solitary cyst consistent with hydatid disease.
Furthermore, scoleces of E. granulosus were noted in the splenic parenchyma immediately adjacent to the cyst.
An indirect hemagglutination test for hydatid disease was negative (b1:32).
As long-term management, the patient was started on Albendazole 400 mg twice daily and he was followed for a period of 6 months.
The patient made a full recovery.
A 59-year-old female was brought to our emergency department with hypovolemic shock caused by massive bleeding from neck stab wounds (Fig. 1).
Her husband reported that she had been working in their garden, but after half an hour, he found her lying supine with extensive bleeding.
When the emergency services arrived at 14:17, she was found in a supine position with a 50 × 60 cm bloodstain mark on her shirt.
Her pulses were undetectable, heart rate was is 90 times per minute, and the diameters of the pupils were both 2 mm with no light reflexes.
Glasgow Coma Scale was E2V1M3.
Ambulance team administered oxygen to the patient and she was transferred to our hospital at 15:00.
She had a past history of depression and anxiety disorder with the following medications: alprazolam 0.4 mg 3T/ Day, clonazepam 1 mg 3T/Day, Lorazepam 0.5 mg 3T/Day, fluvastatin sodium 30 mg 1T/Day, betahistine mesylate 6 mg 3T/Day, nizatidine 150 mg 2 T/Day.
On admission, primary survey was performed.
There was nothing noteworthy regarding airway and breathing.
Respiratory rate was 26 times per min.
Systolic blood pressure was 72 mm Hg, but diastolic blood pressure was undetectable.
Heart rate was 90 times per minute.
There were many incised wounds in the neck (Fig. 1) and incise wounds on her left wrist.
The hypoglossal nerve, the recurrent laryngeal nerve, the phrenic nerve and the vagus nerve appeared intact.
The chest X-ray findings were within normal limits.
No damage to the aorta, the esophagus, and the thoracic duct was found with computed tomography (CT).
Brain CT showed nothing noteworthy.
Hemoglobin level decreased from 11.7 g/dl to 8.1 g/dl an hour after admission.
We decided to do operation for hemostasis, but movement disorder of bilateral lower limbs was noted upon removal of the neck collar.
And she expressed strong pain sited unclearly on her lower back.
We examined the site of pain, which was somewhere around Th10.
She had no past problems and at this time she did not experience any trauma to her lower back.
In neurological examination, all Manual Muscle Tests (MMTs) were 1 in the right lower limb (quadriceps muscle, hamstrings, tibialis anterior muscle, gastrocnemius muscle, and soleus muscle), and all MMTs were 0 in the left lower limb.
There was superficial sensory disturbance, which was more severe on the left side than the right side, in regions below the waist.
Patella tendon and Achilles tendon reflex of the bilateral lower limbs were diminished, and there was no anal reflex.
There were no abnormal reflexes, and deep sensory and positioning sensory were normal.
After we confirmed that the lumbar spine was normal on X-ray, we began operating on the incised wounds under general anesthesia.
The following intraoperative findings were observed: incised wounds reached the sternocleidomastoid muscle.
The external jugular veins were completely severed on both sides; a 3 mm hole was seen on the right internal jugular vein.
The external jugular veins were ligated, and the internal jugular vein was repaired.
And ruptured tendons of palmaris longs and flexor carpi radialis of left wrist were repaired.
The next morning, there was no change concerning neurological observations.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed high intensity signal in spinal and longitudinal area from Th8 to the conus medullaris, and at center of the frontal horn on the upper thoracic spinal cord (owl's eye appearance) on T2 weighted images (Fig. 2).
We diagnosed the patient with SCI due to ischemia of the Adam-Kiewicz artery, considering the site of the injury.
We started administration of edaravone 30 mg × 2/Day and concentrated glycerin, fructose 500 ml/Day.
The general condition stabilized, but paraplegia and dissociated sensory loss remained.
Fourteen days after the injury, we performed another MRI, but we could not find any changes (Fig. 3).
After 1 year, there was no significant recovery of the superficial sensory systems.
Regarding movement disorder, almost all MMT test results of the left lower limb were 0/5 except for the quadriceps muscle, which was 2.
All MMT test results of the right lower limb were 2 except for the quadriceps muscle, which was 4.
She remained in a sitting position in a wheelchair with trunk support, and she needed assistance in transferring to a wheelchair.
The patient is a 32 year old female diagnosed with severe psycho-motoric retardation.
She is a permanent resident of an institution for chronically debilitated children.
She is heavily medicated with psychiatric drugs including carbamazepine, haloperidol, promethazine and clonex due to endless restlessness and previous incidents of foreign body ingestions.
Previous events resulted in multiple endoscopic removals and one previous surgical procedure.
The patient was admitted to another hospital due to fever of unknown origin.
On admission she was tachycardic, restless.
Spiking fever up to 40 °C (104 F) was reported.
Although physical examination is unreliable due to her restlessness and cognitive impairment the abdomen was soft and nontender.
Laboratory results were all within the normal limits.
Her work up included Chest x-ray that was normal and a computerized tomography (CT) scan of the chest and abdomen.
The CT scan identiﬁed several foreign bodies within the right colon (Fig. 1a), one of which was penetrating the colon at the hepatic ﬂexure that was leaning upon the vena cava.
The foreign body penetrated the vena cava resulting in intraluminal air (Fig. 1b).
The patient was transferred to our hospital for further treatment.
On arrival the patient had spiking fever of 39.5 °C.
She was hemodynamically stable.
The CT scan was reviewed and surgery was planned accordingly.
The patient received ﬂuids and antibiotics, Foley catheter and a nasogastric tube were inserted.
During the operation a latero-medial mobilization of the right colon was performed.
The foreign body (7 cm wooden tree branch) that penetrated the colon and the inferior vena cave was identiﬁed.
The colon was carefully resected leaving the foreign body impaled in the vena cava for further control of the blood vessel before extracting it from the vein.
Right hemicolectomy was performed.
After removing the colon, the right lobe of the liver was fully mobilized.
Full exposure of the retro-hepatic vena cava enabled removal of the foreign bodies under proximal and distal control of the vena cava.
The hole in the vena cava was debrided and repaired.
Only then primary ileocolic anastomosis followed.
Operative course was uneventful.
Post-operative course was complicated with recurrent high fevers, blood cultures revealed penicillin resistant enterococcus, staph hemolyticus, Escherichia coli, and candida glabrata resistant to ﬂuconazole treated with caspofungin.
Due to the persistence of fevers a CT scan of the chest and abdomen was performed and a small collection of ﬂuid in the retro-hepatic region was revealed and drained.
Trans-esophageal echocardiography showed no evidence of endocarditis.
US Doppler of the vena cava revealed a 2.5 cm thrombus within the retro-hepatic vena cava.
A positron emission tomography (PET) CT ruled out infected thrombophlebitis of the vena cava.
The patient recovered with IV antibiotics and the rest of her hospitalization was uneventful.
She was discharged for follow-up in the outpatient clinic.
A 6-year old male was admitted to our emergency department after a wooden stick penetrated his right eye and came out after falling on the street.
On admission, his general condition was well and Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) was 15.
There was widespread periorbital edema on his right eye.
Pupils were isochoric, pupil reﬂexes globe movements were intact bilaterally.
He showed no motor or neurologic deﬁcits.
On cranial computed tomography (CT) a displaced fracture on the right superior and posterior orbital wall and right frontal subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) were observed.
The optic nerve was intact (Fig. 1).
Ophthalmology was consulted and tetanus vaccine was administered.
2 h later the patient's condition worsened and control CT showed cytotoxic edema on the right hemisphere.
4 h after admission the patient had 40 °C fever.
Due to cytotoxic edema lumbar puncture was not considered.
A single dose of 1 mg/kg Mannitol was administered for the cerebral edema and empirical antibiotics in form of Ceftriaxone-Vancomycin were given.
On the following day, 12 h after admission, a decrease in GCS was observed.
Heavy eﬀusion with parenchymal character was coming from his right eye (Fig. 2).
Diﬀuse cerebral edema (Fig. 3a) with progression of the SAH were seen on CT (Fig. 3b) and the patient underwent immediate surgery.
An external ventricular catheter (EVD) with an intracerebral pressure monitoring probe was placed.
Beginning pressure was measured as 32 mm Hg.
After suﬃcient cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) drainage a wide 10 × 10 cm frontotemporal craniectomy was performed.
Brain parenchymal invasion in the right orbital canal was observed.
The free bone fragments of the orbit were removed and the dura was repaired using galeal graft and the orbital wall was reconstructed.
Due to cerebral edema the bone ﬂap was not put back and placed in the subcutaneous tissue under the intercostal space.
Regression of the cerebral edema was observed in the postoperative cranial CT (Fig. 4).
ICP was measured as 6 mm Hg.
The patient was extubated 6 days after surgery.
He was cooperative for simple verbal commands.
No motor deﬁcit was observed and was released from hospital after 21 days without any motor or neurologic deﬁcits.
On his third month follow-up he did not show any complaints and underwent cranioplasty surgery from his own autologous bone graft harvested from his subcutaneous tissue (Fig. 5).
A 50 year old male was brought in by ambulance to a rural emergency department following a tyre explosion.
The patient was fitting treads to industrial rims and inflating them to specifications.
He had completed fitting three of the four tyres when the tread of the fourth tyre failed releasing a blast of compressed air at approximately 80 kPa.
The patient was standing in close proximity to the tyre when the blast occurred.
The patient recalled being thrown backwards into another vehicle then collapsing onto the ground.
A witness reported a brief loss of consciousness with no obvious head strike or significant impact with the second vehicle.
On arrival to the rural emergency department the patient was alert and oriented with no imminent airway, breathing or circulation issues identified.
He was observed in the emergency department over a period of hours with no evidence of clinical deterioration.
Prior to discharge the general surgical team were requested to review the patient.
On review by the general surgical team the patient remained hemodynamically stable however was complaining of increasing abdominal bloating and pain.
He had significant bruising to the anterior abdominal wall and diffuse tenderness to palpation with involuntary guarding.
Secondary survey revealed only a superficial laceration to the distal shaft of the penis.
CT imaging of the abdomen demonstrated hyperdense free fluid within the abdomen and significant focal bowel wall thickening and submucosal oedema involving the splenic flexure, ascending colon and terminal ileum with adjacent fat stranding.
Mesenteric hematomas were identified in the mesentery of the jejunum and ileum with deformity of the anterior wall of the caecum and an adjacent gas locule suggestive of perforation.
A left adrenal hematoma was noted and anterior compression of the L1 and L2 vertebral bodies which was favoured to be chronic and degenerative in nature.
The patient was taken to theatre for exploratory laparotomy at the rural base hospital.
On laparotomy there was a moderate volume of hemoperitoneum.
Mesenteric hematomas were noted within the small bowel mesentery.
There was non-viable bowel extending from the caecum to the hepatic flexure.
A small capsular tear to segment 5 of the liver was noted.
The patient underwent a right hemicolectomy with stapled side to side primary anastomosis.
Following laparotomy, the patient was transferred stable and intubated to a tertiary trauma centre.
On arrival to the trauma centre he was hypotensive with a systolic blood pressure of 85 and HR 100 and was taken for completion CT trauma series imaging.
Repeat imaging at the trauma centre additionally found bibasal pulmonary consolidation in keeping with dependant change, and a small left upper pole renal laceration.
The patient was admitted to ICU for haemodynamic support however stabilised rapidly and was extubated 24 h later.
He transferred back to the rural base hospital after 7 days at the trauma centre and was discharged home two days later following an uncomplicated admission.
Histopathological examination of the resected specimen demonstrated a 60x40mm section of haemorrhagic mesentery and macroscopically a 65 mm segment of dusky small bowel with mesentery at this site separated from the bowel wall.
Microscopic analysis of the affected small bowel demonstrated ischaemic change with occasional organising thrombi seen in large mesenteric vessels.
These findings were consistent with findings of primary blast injury.
A 66-year old osteoporotic woman presented to the emergency room with right sided hip pain following a mechanical fall.
The patient provided informed consent, which followed the McGill University Health Centre guidelines for experimental investigation.
The patient was exiting her car when she slipped on the ice and landed on her right side.
10 years prior to her presentation, she sustained a right intertrochanteric femur fracture which was treated with a DHS.
Since then, she has been on alendronate for her osteoporosis.
On examination, there was clear shortening and external rotation of the right leg, but she was neurovascularly intact.
She did not sustain any head trauma or loss of consciousness.
The patient's x-ray showed a subtrochanteric fracture distal to the DHS plate (Fig. 1).
She was booked for removal of the DHS followed by antegrade femoral nailing.
During the operation, removal of the DHS failed with the usual technique as the side plate was cold welded to the hip screw.
We resorted to using a diamond burr to cut the top of the barrel on the DHS to assist with its removal.
This technique also failed and the final method attempted was helicoptering the plate out with the screw as a single unit in a counterclockwise direction.
During that maneuver, we applied excessive torque and subsequently felt a sudden give.
The possibility of a fracture was confirmed by fluoroscopy and the x-ray showed an iatrogenic subcapital femoral neck fracture (Fig. 2A, B).
Failure to remove the hardware and the unexpected femoral neck fracture in conjunction with the unavailability of an arthroplasty surgeon, the procedure was decided to be aborted as we were not prepared for a complex total hip arthroplasty.
The incision was closed in layer and skin traction was applied.
The next day and after thorough planning, the DHS was removed using a standard posterior approach with the morselization of the femoral head.
The difficulty experienced with the removal of the DHS is evident by its aesthetics following removal.
Subsequently a total hip replacement was performed using a long fully porous coated stem prosthesis and periprosthetic cerclage wires were added to bypass the fracture site, with good implant positioning on post op x-ray (Fig. 3).
Following definitive management of her hip fracture, Alendronic acid treatment was stopped.
Instead, the patient was started on vitamin D, calcium, denosumab and teriparatide as for patients who have failed typical osteoporosis therapy with a follow up in 3 months with the patient's family doctor and rheumatologist.
The patient was followed up in arthroplasty clinic and was mobilizing well with no difficulties or complications.
Her 2-year follow-up x-ray is shown with satisfactory position of the hardware (Fig. 4).
A 69-year-old woman sustained blunt trauma from a pedestrian traﬃc accident.
She had no medical history except subtotal gastrectomy for gastric cancer six years prior.
On arrival, she was alert with a blood pressure of 104/68 mmHg, pulse rate of 95 beats/ min, respiratory rate of 23/min, and hemoglobin level of 8.2 g/dL.
Physical examination revealed tenderness on the abdomen and abdomen distension.
Focused assessment with sonography for trauma showed intraabdominal ﬂuid in the Morison pouch and splenorenal recess.
Abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan revealed laceration of the right kidney, involving the calyx in the lower pole in accordance to grade IV of the AAST renal injury scale, and a surrounding perirenal hematoma similar to intraperitoneal bleeding, not retroperitoneal hematoma.
The injury severity score was 26 with multiple rib fractures, pneumothorax requiring thoracostomy, grade I liver laceration, and skin laceration of the eyebrow.
She underwent emergency laparotomy because of aggravating abdomen distension and unstable hemodynamics.
During the surgery, the right kidney was found to be an intraperitoneal organ that was lying free at the right of the duodenum and above the mesocolon of the transverse colon without perirenal fat tissues and Gerota's fascia (Fig. 2A).
Furthermore, it had a laceration in the lower pole and renal vein injury with active bleeding into the intraperitoneal space.
Right nephrectomy was completed only with ligation of hilar vessels and ureter, and without dissection of any underlying tissues or right-sided medial visceral rotation (Fig. 2B).
The intraperitoneal kidney had anatomically normal renal vessels, renal pelvis, and ureter, but was shorter (8.5 cm).
Laceration in the lower pole had involved the calyx (Fig. 3).
The patient was discharged on postoperative day 23 without any complications.
An otherwise healthy 13 year old female presented to the trauma bay after a bicycle accident.
Primary survey was within normal limits with vital signs appropriate for age and Glasgow Coma Score of 15.
Secondary survey was remarkable for a deep 3 centimeter (cm) laceration in the left lower quadrant.
There was active bleeding from the wound, with bowel herniating through a fascial defect.
Given these ﬁndings the patient was brought to the operating room for exploration.
An exploratory laparotomy was performed via extension of the existing wound.
The underlying fascial defect was found to be approximately 5 cm.
A serosal tear on the sigmoid colon was identiﬁed and over-sewn.
Venous bleeding from the base of the sigmoid mesentery was controlled with suture ligation.
No further injuries were identiﬁed and no additional hemorrhage or ﬂuid was noted.
The complex abdominal wall injury was repaired primarily.
Routine admission urinalysis revealed microscopic hematuria, so computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis with intravenous (IV) contrast was obtained post-operatively.
No further traumatic injury was identiﬁed, however delayed images were not obtained.
A cystogram was obtained which did not demonstrate injury to the bladder.
The patient's postoperative course was notable for a doubling of the serum creatinine from 0.6 mg/dL (53.04 μmol/L) to 1.2 mg/dL (106.08 μmol/L).
She also experienced ongoing abdominal pain, increasing distention and nausea.
A retroperitoneal ultrasound was unremarkable except for large volume ascites.
A non-contrast repeat CT of the abdomen and pelvis on postoperative day ﬁve demonstrated a large amount of ascites with a density of simple ﬂuid.
The patient underwent repeat laparotomy.
Upon entry to the abdomen three liters of ﬂuid was drained, and intraoperative analysis revealed a ﬂuid creatinine of 4.6 mg/dL (406.64 μmol/L).
The left ureter was found to be transected near the middle third with the two ends approximately 2.5 cm apart.
Ureterogram was performed via the transected ends to conﬁrm anatomy (Fig. 1).
Primary repair over a double-J stent was performed with 5-0 Vicryl and a drain left in place in the retroperitoneum.
Post-operatively the patient recovered well and was discharged ﬁve days later after the operative drain was removed.
The double-J stent was removed at postoperative week six with concurrent cystoscopy and retrograde ureterogram demonstrating a normal ureter with no evidence of stricture.
A 34-year-old woman was transferred to our emergency department from another hospital after removal of a knife from the right upper quadrant (RUQ) of her abdomen.
She complained of tenderness in the entire abdomen.
Her initial vital signs were stable, and we noticed a 5-cm laceration in her abdominal RUQ.
She had been taking anti-insomnia drugs.
Laboratory examination results were normal, except for an increased a white blood count of 20,890/mm3.
An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan was performed and showed a hematoma around the site of the stab wound and right psoas muscle (Fig. 1).
A simple abdominal radiograph at the bed-side was performed 15 min after the CT scan, which showed leakage of contrast material around the right ureter (Fig. 2).
An emergency laparotomy was performed.
There was a tear in the right rectus muscle, with active bleeding.
Moreover, a ureter injury of nearly 50% of the ureter circumference was detected around the right psoas muscle, causing a hematoma that led me to suspect a stab wound (Fig. 3); however, no other organ injury was found.
An uretero-ureterostomy was performed using a ﬁne chromic catgut after stenting of the ureteral catheter.
The postoperative course was uneventful except for focal ﬂank pain, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 12.
Two weeks after discharge, the patient visited the outpatient clinic due to right ﬂank pain.
Abdominal CT scan was performed, and massive liquefaction of the hematoma was observed in the injured area of the right psoas muscle.
The ﬂank area pain subsided after drainage was performed using a percutaneous catheter.
At two months post-surgery, intravenous pyelography was performed, and the double-J stent was removed.