Case report

A 27-year-old elite-level rugby union player was participating in an international test match and sustained a blow to his head from
another player's knee. There was no loss of consciousness or memory loss, although immediately after impact the patient reported
feeling confused, which resolved over several seconds. He continued playing for an additional 15 min before alerting the head team
physician (MRS) and match day doctor (JSA) about vision changes in his right eye and stating his left leg was “not responding
properly”. Upon sideline evaluation, his neurologic exam was normal despite the patient's subjective complaints. However, his
complaint of neurological deﬁcits prompted immediate application of a cervical collar and transport to the nearest Level 1 trauma
center for further evaluation. The decision for transport was based on his subjective neurological symptoms after a direct blow to the
head, despite a normal examination.
Upon arrival to the emergency department the player was hemodynamically stable with a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 15. No
other injuries were identiﬁed. His medical history included three documented head concussions that all responded to conservative
measures with no prolonged symptoms, he had no other known head trauma. Additional history was relevant for minor muscu-
loskeletal trauma, including an acromioclavicular separation, but no other medical conditions or co-morbidities. On exam, the player
could accurately recall the event. The neurological motor exam was unremarkable in all four extremities, including his left lower
extremity. He had intact sensation to light touch in his upper and lower extremities. Pupils were equal, round, and reactive to light.
Extraocular movements and cranial nerves II-XII were intact.
Emergent CT scan without contrast identiﬁed a crescent shaped extra-axial ﬂuid collection consistent with a subdural hematoma
and 10 mm midline shift (Figs. 1 & 2). The posterior and temporal horn of the right ventricle were nearly completely eﬀaced. The
posterior aspect of the hematoma was hyperdense, consistent with an acute bleed, while the anterior half appeared isodense with the
cerebral cortex. The heterogeneous density likely represents unclotted blood anteriorly, but could also reﬂect acute on chronic
bleeding or cerebrospinal ﬂuid extravasation into the subarachnoid space due to an arachnoid laceration. There were no additional
lesions noted. The hospital's neurosurgeon was immediately contacted and the player underwent an emergent right frontoparietal
craniotomy and hematoma evacuation. The patient's rehabilitation course included inpatient and outpatient physical therapy, ulti-
mately making a full recovery without any neurological or cognitive deﬁcits. He subsequently retired from competitive rugby and has
become a coach for a professional rugby club.