Case report

A 15-year-old woman was diagnosed with osteogenesis imperfecta (Sillence Type I) at a regional reference pediatric hospital.
Although a genetic characterization of the disease is currently underway and the patient never underwent a bone density test, she
expresses the same phenotypic traits as her mother, who suﬀers from autosomal dominant OI. Following a fall from a chair during an
epileptic seizure, the young patient came to our observation. Medical history did not predict any other fractures. She was not taking
bisphosphonates before the injury but she was taking valproic acid for epilepsy.
On physical examination the patient had blue sclera, bilateral ipoacusia, inability to ambulate, and absolute impossibility to
active and passive motion of both hips due to pain.
The imaging showed acetabular fractures, which were classiﬁed as associated both-column fractures with protrusio acetabuli
(Fig. 1). Three dimensional reconstructed computed tomography (CT) examination revealed a greater degree of comminution and
displacement than could be appreciated on the plain radiographs (Fig. 2).
Once informed consent was obtained from the patient and her parents, the preoperative preparation by the orthopaedic and
anaesthesia team consisted in typing and cross matching eight units of packed red blood cells, fresh frozen plasma, cryoprecipitate,
desmopressin, and interoperative cell salvage capability available for the operation.
On the ﬁfth post-trauma day, considering the young age of the patient, the comorbidities and the operative duration, we opted for
the ﬁxation of the acetabula in two surgical steps.
At ﬁrst, we performed ORIF of bilateral posterior columns via Iselin approach. A pelvic reconstruction plate was shaped and
positioned along the perimeter of the pelvis until its ﬁxation (Fig. 3). The patient was extremely osteopenic, bones were very fragile,
and the reduction obtained from the fracture was the best possible given the starting conditions. Since on the right side the posterior
synthesis alone appeared insuﬃcient to guarantee a lasting reduction of the femoral head in the acetabulum, we drilled a Kirschner
wire to provide stable ﬁxation and to avoid possible future dislocations.
The second surgical step was performed on post-injury day ten via a bilateral modiﬁed Stoppa approach and augmented by
creating the lateral window of the ilioinguinal approach [5]. Bilaterally, there were multiple devitalised, free-ﬂoating, articular
fragments medial to the quadrilateral surface that were deemed no-reconstructible. Two dedicated suprapectineal plate® (Stryker
corporate, Selzach, Switzerland) were applied to reconstruct anterior column and quadrilateral lamina of both hips.
The post-operative period was uneventful, hemoglobin never fell below 10 mg/dl and intraoperatively the blood loss was less than
400 cl and no blood transfusion was necessary. She was mobilized on crutches with touch weight-bearing for six weeks and partial
weight-bearing for another six weeks.
After three weeks, the patient was discharged to home therapy with bisphosphonates and referred to a specialist center for OI
disease. We followed the patient weekly for one month, then monthly until the sixth month, with radiographic control at 30, 60 and
120 days (Fig. 4). The hips function was evaluated with Harris Hip Score (HHS) with result of 45/100 at the ﬁnal follow-up. The
Numeric Pain Rating Scale (NPRS), a segmented numeric version of the visual analog scale (VAS), used to assess pain intensity,
reported a score of 5/10 (moderate pain) at the ﬁnal follow-up. The last radiographic examination showed an adequate reduction of
the fracture and a satisfactory wall and bone stock for a subsequent prosthesis: the patient developed a bilateral post-traumatic
arthrosis with heterotopic calciﬁcations typical of the underlying disease.