Case report

28-year lady was brought to the ED with an alleged history of accidental strangulation by cloth while working in ﬁelds. The
patient presented to us after 8 h of trauma. Airway was patent and the cervical spine motion was restricted. A patterned bruise of
strangulation was present in the middle of the neck (Fig. 1). Larynx and cricotracheal junction were normal to palpation. Breathing
and circulation were normal and there was no neurological disability. Mild surgical emphysema was present in the face and neck.
CECT neck revealed tracheal transection more than 50% of the circumference and an abnormally dilated segment of the esophagus
(Fig. 2). Contrast esophagogram wasn't performed as the patient had an upfront indication of exploration. CT Angio revealed
complete luminal occlusion of left Common Carotid Artery due to thrombosis 3 cm below bifurcation (Fig. 3); however, the contrast
was present in the internal carotid artery presumably entering retrogradely from external carotid artery. Interventional radiology
expertise for CCA stenting wasn't available. The patient was taken up for emergent exploration where complete transection of the
trachea was repaired along with the esophagus. CCA exploration revealed a contused artery not amenable to resection and end to end
repair. CCA size precluded the use of saphenous graft due to anticipated luminal discrepancy and subsequent turbulent ﬂow. PTFE
and Dacron couldn't be arranged in the middle of the night. The operating surgeon decided to manage CCA contusion and thrombosis
non-operatively as the patient presented after 8 h and majority strokes in Grade 4 injury would have manifested in this period. CCA
ligation wasn't done in the apprehension of antegrade thrombus propagation post ligation.
Unfortunately, the patient developed right hemiparesis in the immediate post-operative period. MR brain with angiogram re-
vealed thrombus propagation involving ICA and Left MCA and conﬁrmed stroke (Fig. 4). The patient was started on anticoagulation
and intensive physiotherapy. Her maximal power was 2/5 in the upper limb and 3/5 in the lower limb. With physiotherapy, she
started regaining strength and by the third postoperative day, she had regained full power and could write and walk independently.
Follow up Doppler showed no recanalization (Fig. 5). The rest post-op period was uneventful and the patient was discharged home
neurologically intact, on antithrombotic therapy.
