Case report

We describe the case of a 15 year old boy who presented with generalised abdominal pain following 
a seemingly minor collision at weekend soccer. Investigation revealed a grade IV pancreatic injury
that was subsequently managed with pancreatic stent insertion by endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography
(ERCP) and total parenteral nutrition (TPN) prior to recommencing low fat diet 10 days post-injury.
A previously well 15 year old male presented to the Emergency department at 1600 h, 4 hours after a
seemingly minor blunt abdominal injury during a weekend soccer match. Initially following the impact of an-
other player's knee to the abdomen, the adolescent rested out of the game for half an hour before returning to
play the second half. Following the game, he returned home, tolerated an afternoon meal before the gradual
onset of constant, dull, severe, non-radiating, generalised abdominal pain that was not exacerbated by move-
ment. Due to family concerns, the patient presented to our Level I Tertiary referral trauma centre by own
means. He was normotensive and not tachycardic. The patient had no signiﬁcant medical history. Physical ex-
amination revealed a guarded abdomen. Focused Assessment with Sonography for Trauma (FAST) suggested
a trace of free ﬂuid in the sagittal pelvic image. The initial blood pathology was normal except for an elevation
of amylase 410 units/l, lipase 771 units/l and white cell count 12.2 × 109/l. He was admitted for observation
and serial clinical and FAST assessments.
The patient's symptoms failed to improve after 24 h observation, during which time he developed shoul-
der tip and central back pain. A repeat FAST 24 h post-admission again revealed possible trace free ﬂuid in the
sagittal pelvic images with new concerns regarding trace free ﬂuid to the spleno-renal angle. A computed-
tomography (CT) scan was performed with intravenous contrast. This revealed a transverse laceration
through the neck of the pancreas with normal enhancement of the pancreas and no pancreatic duct dilatation
(Fig. 1) consistent with American Association for the Surgery of Trauma (AAST) Organ Injury Scale (OIS) grade
IV injury. Additionally there was a small volume, low density intraperitoneal ﬂuid, retroperitoneal stranding,
omental contusion and a small linear laceration of the posterior left kidney without peri-nephric collection
(AAST-OIS Grade II injury). There was no injury to the other solid organs or the duodenum.
The patient was kept nil by mouth with intravenous antibiotics, TPN and octreotide 100 mg three times a
day via a percutaneous inserted central catheter (PICC). Ongoing central abdominal pain consistent with acute
pancreatitis prompted further imaging on day 2 by magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP).
This conﬁrmed the CT ﬁndings and the patient was booked for ERCP the following day. At ERCP, the pancreatic
duct was selectively cannulated and contrast extravasation was seen at the pancreatic neck (Fig. 2). A 5 cm 5Fr
pigtail plastic stent was inserted across the defect and the patient remained on TPN and octreotide for 10 days.
Repeat MRCP 10 days later showed a contiguous main pancreatic duct of normal calibre and appearance with
no evidence of transection and improvement of the peri-pancreatic oedema. The patient was allowed to re-
sume a low fat diet and TPN was weaned and ceased. The patient returned home on pantoprazole 40 mg
daily, he was electively brought back to hospital 12 days later for ERCP and stent removal. At ERCP the pigtail
stent was not seen, having likely passed out, and there was no evidence of extravasation of contrast, consistent
with resolution of injury (Fig. 3). Follow-up as an outpatient was without incident over a three-month period.
The patient has been advised not to partake in contact sports for six months.