Case report

A 75-year-old male with history of atrial ﬁbrillation on Rivaroxaban was struck by a motor vehicle. Upon arrival he was hy-
potensive but with a Glasgow Coma Score of 15. A strategy of permissive hypotension was maintained based upon the patient's
mental status. Plain radiographs and CT imaging were obtained and demonstrated multiple rib fractures and a celiac artery injury
with contrast extravasation and associated hematoma (Fig. 1A–B). He was immediately transported to our hybrid operating room and
placed under general anesthesia. Percutaneous femoral artery access was obtained and aortography was performed. This demon-
strated a complete avulsion of the celiac artery with distal reconstitution via retrograde ﬁling from the superior mesenteric artery
(Fig. 2). Initially, given the stability of the patient, attempts were made to traverse the injury to perform endovascular intervention in
a hybrid operating room but these were unsuccessful despite the use of multiple wire, catheter, and sheath combinations. The patient
was already prepped for and immediately underwent a midline laparotomy, as there was obvious concern that he may either de-
compensate or the injury might not be amenable to endovascular intervention. The celiac axis and aorta were explored through the
lesser sac and control of the celiac origin was obtained with a side-biting aortic clamp with scant back-bleeding from the distal celiac
stump. The splenic artery and common hepatic artery were isolated and the left gastric artery was ligated. The gastroduodenal artery
was patent; however, worsening hepatic ischemia was visualized during the case this ligation alone was felt to be unsafe. Therefore
an aorto-celiac bypass with a 6-mm Dacron graft was performed utilizing the supra-celiac aorta as the inﬂow source. The celiac stump
was over-sewn. A temporary abdominal closure was performed and the patient was transferred to the surgical intensive care unit for
resuscitation. His abdomen was closed four days after his initial operation. A prolonged hospital course ensued with complications
including a pancreatic leak with pseudocyst formation necessitating ERCP and endoscopic cyst-gastrotomy, pneumonia, acute kidney
injury, and splenic artery pseudoaneurysm managed by exclusion and embolization. The patient was discharged home and expired
22 months after his trauma from acute respiratory failure leading to hypoxic brain injury. Consent was obtained for the publication of
this report.