Trauma Case Reports 1 (2015) 44–48

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Trauma Case Reports

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : h t t p : / / w w w . j o u r n a l s . e l s e v i e r . c o m /

t r a u m a - c a s e - r e p o r t s /

Case Report
Blunt trauma: An uncommon cause of common bile duct injury
Zachary Sanford a,1, Kamran Abdolmaali b,1, Dustin Robinson b,1, David Denning b,1
a Joan C. Edwards School of Medicine (JCESOM), Marshall University, Huntington, WV 25701
b Department of Surgery, JCESOM Marshall University, Huntington, WV 25701

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Accepted 19 October 2015
Available online 6 November 2015

Keywords:
Blunt abdominal trauma
extrahepatic bile duct injury

Blunt force trauma to the extrahepatic biliary ductal system as a cause of
avulsion is an uncommon injury associated with wide variability in
prognosis. These cases are often difﬁcult to identify, primarily as they
are complicated by trauma patients exhibiting more immediate and ob-
viously life-threatening injuries. This case demonstrates a 46 year-old-
male involved in a head on motor vehicle collision, sustaining blunt
force abdominal trauma resulting in partial transection of the common
bile duct. Injury was discovered incidentally on exploratory laparotomy
post endovascular repair of abdominal thoracic aortic rupture. Open
cholescystectomy with intraoperative cholangiogram was performed,
isolating extravasation from the common bile duct. A 16-French T-
tube was placed in the common bile duct and two large #24 Jackson-
Pratt tubes were placed in the vicinity. The procedure was well-
tolerated and the patient was discharged with T-tube in place. Discharge
was on postoperative day 28 with removal of tubes on postoperative
day 54 and the patient was able to make a full recovery.
© 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article
under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

Introduction

Disruption of the biliary tree secondary to blunt force trauma is a rare cause for extrahepatic bile duct in-
jury [1–3]. Seldom occurring in isolation, this family of injuries is easily overshadowed by more overt surgical
emergencies and can go undetected, potentially leading to adverse outcomes. A variety of imaging modalities
have been used to varying degrees of success in identifying biliary tree disruption for stable patients but in
emergent settings exploratory laparotomy remains the most efﬁcacious means for identifying injury [4,5].

E-mail address: sanford12@marshall.edu (Z. Sanford).

1 Joan C Edwards School of Medicine, Department of Surgery, 1600 Medical Center Drive, Huntington, WV 25701. Fax: +1 304 691

1215.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tcr.2015.10.004
2352-6440/© 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

Z. Sanford et al. / Trauma Case Reports 1 (2015) 44–48

45

This case presents an example of one such rare blunt force trauma shearing injury to the common bile duct in
the setting of a motor vehicle collision.

Case report

A 46 year old male was an alcohol-intoxicated restrained passenger in a head-on motor vehicle collision,
suffering blunt force abdominal trauma. At the collision site EMS recorded a Glasgow Coma Score of 15 with
stable vital signs. He was transferred to Cabell Huntington Hospital where he was intubated and found to be
tachycardic and profoundly academic to an arterial pH of 7.19 with accompanying base deﬁcit of -11. Hemo-
globin was 12.9, hematocrit 37.1, PT 11.5 sec, and APTT 23.5 sec. CT showed acute thoracic aortic rupture with
a large volume of blood inferiorly along the aorta, right middle and lower lobe lung contusions, and a 4 cm
laceration along the inferior lobe of the liver with blood in the renal hilum suggesting right renovascular injury
and free ﬂuid within the pelvis (Fig. 1a). He was transferred to Saint Mary’s Medical Center for emergent man-
agement of aortic rupture.

Emergent surgical management of the ruptured thoracic aorta was completed by the cardiothoracic team.
Upon completion, initiation of exploratory laparotomy was begun, noting blood in the peritoneum and bile
staining in the right upper quadrant associated with the transverse and hepatic ﬂexures of the colon. The gall-
bladder was visibly distended, ﬁrm to palpation, and discolored but showed no signs of rupture. Subcapsular
hematoma was appreciated along the right posterior lobe of the liver but showed no signs of actively
expanding or gross laceration. Open cholescystectomy with intraoperative cholangiogram was performed
on a thick, distended and grossly-discolored gallbladder consistent with hemorrhage into the gallbladder
lumen (Fig. 1b). Conray contrast was used to demonstrate a completely intact biliary tree with extravasation

a

b

c

Fig. 1. (a) Abdominal CT illustrating accumulation of blood in the gallbladder secondary to blunt force trauma sustained in motor vehicle
collision (arrows); (b) Intraoperative cholangiogram with no evidence for common bile duct obstruction (radiolucent ﬁlling defect seen
likely reﬂecting air bubbles in the duct); (c) Abdominal CT on postoperative day ten showing successful drainage of the operative site via
T-tube.

4
6

Z

.

S
a
n
f
o
r
d
e
t
a
l
.

/

T
r
a
u
m
a
C
a
s
e
R
e
p
o
r
t
s
1
(
2
0
1
5
)
4
4
–
4
8

Fig. 2. Representation of blunt force abdominal trauma sustained in a head on motor vehicle collision resulting in partial transection of the common bile duct. Injury was discovered incidentally during
exploratory laparotomy status post repair of thoracic aortic rupture.

Z. Sanford et al. / Trauma Case Reports 1 (2015) 44–48

47

noted from the common bile duct. Duodenal injury was ruled out by passing methylene blue through the
orogastric tube with no extravasation appreciated and colon was assessed via direct visualization by Kocher
maneuver and mobilization of the hepatic ﬂexure. Due to the duration of the thoracic aorta repair and the ex-
ploratory laparotomy, the decision was made to place a 16-French T-tube in the common bile duct in addition
to two large #24 Jackson-Pratt tubes in the vicinity of the bile duct (Fig. 2). The patient was maintained on
ventilator in the neurotrauma intensive care unit. In the postoperative period the T-tube drained golden
brown bile and was well-tolerated.

Urine collection via Foley catheter showed blood-tinged urine that persisted until POD 10 but then spon-
taneously resolved. During this time on POD 6 the patient underwent gastrostomy with placement of percu-
taneous gastrostomy and tracheostomy tubes. Due to the PEG becoming disloged on POD 8 the patient
underwent exploratory laparotomy and gastrostomy with jejunostomy tube placement and removal of for-
eign body. Evaluation on postoperative day 10 showed successful drainage of the operative site via T-tube
(Fig. 1c). The patient continued to improve and was discharged on POD 28 with T-tube and J tubes in place.
Recovery was complicated during the outpatient course as frank blood began appearing in the patient’s
urine on POD 39 and the patient began complaining of pain around tube sites. CT urogram showed no residual
renal injury and was presumed to be due to residual posttraumatic blood accumulation. Of note, a small
amount of ﬂuid was appreciated in the anterior right middle and upper abdomen along the inferior right
lobe of the liver not seen previously but consistent with postoperative seroma. A urinary tract infection was
diagnosed and managed medically. T tube cholangiogram revealed no abnormalities and the the T-tube
was removed along with J-tube on POD 54. The remainder of the patient’s recovery period was uneventful
with regards to hepatobiliary procedures, however frank blood in the urine persisted for an additional
6 months due complications of subclinical traumatic kidney injury sustained during the motor vehicle
collision.

Discussion

Injuries of this nature are complex and, due to their infrequency, often evade detection by trauma physi-
cians. Incidence of extrahepatic biliary duct injury in the setting of blunt force trauma has been reported to be
as low as 1 in 10,500 consecutive trauma cases [6], with the ﬁrst case being reported in 1799 [5]. Proper diag-
nosis requires a high index of suspicion and without an agreed upon universal protocol for management out-
comes are widely variable [7–9].

Ductal injury often localizes at one of three anatomic sites: the origin of the left hepatic duct, the bifurca-
tion of the hepatic ducts, or the panceaticoduodenal junction [10,11]. We report a case of common bile duct
injury at the third of these anatomic sites that was identiﬁed by a combination of CT and exploratory laparot-
omy. Although imaging modalities such as CT and ultrasound can result in signiﬁcant false negatives, more
sensitive modalities such as cholangiotransparietohepatography (CTPH), endoscopic retrograde cholangiog-
raphy (ERCP), and MRI are more appropriate in non-emergent settings [8]. Other modalities, such as percuta-
neous aspiration and isotope scintigraphy such as with hepatobiliary iminodiacetic acid (HIDA) are also
options for nonemergent evaluation however diagnostic value is limited due to their inability to speciﬁcally
localize site of injury [10,12].

In the absence of hemodynamic instability assessed by exploratory laparotomy, injury can be overlooked.
The presence of jaundice after blunt force trauma should raise concerns for biliary tree injury and, while non-
speciﬁc, generalized symptoms such as worsening abdominal discomfort, nausea, vomiting, low-grade fever
and persistent ileus can help raise suspicion [13]. Due to the delay in onset of these symptoms, morbidity rates
in these cases can approach 40%, including bleeding, infection, and compartment syndrome [9,10]. Even when
managed urgently, surgical complications can result in postoperative anastomotic leakage, recurrent
cholangitis with or without stricture, biliary cirrhosis, and portal hypertension [10,14].

Due to the infrequency of this injury in abdominal blunt force trauma cases, clinicians should be weary to
remember the extrahepatic biliary ductal system can perforate or even completely transect even without
other obvious thoracoabdominal injury, potentially evading detection for some time and possibly complicat-
ing course of recovery. Physicians should maintain a high index of suspicion with deteriorating posttraumatic
patients exhibiting biliary obstruction symptoms in the nonemergent patient and should always look for bile
staining or signs of biliary perforation when surgically repairing emergent cases.

48

Z. Sanford et al. / Trauma Case Reports 1 (2015) 44–48

Conﬂicts of interest

No members of the research or clinical team have any stated or potential conﬂicts of interest.

References

[1] J.M. Ramia, G. Gutierrez, D. Garrote, A. Mansilla, J. Villar, J.A. Ferron, Isolated extrahepatic bile duct rupture in blunt abdominal trau-

ma, Am. J. Emerg. Med. 23 (2) (Mar 2005) 231–232.

[2] W.S. Fletcher, Nonpenetrating trauma to the gallbladder and extrahepatic bile ducts, Surg. Clin. North Am. 52 (3) (Jun 1972)

[3] A.K. Ng, R.K. Simons, W.C. Torreggiani, S.G. Ho, A.W. Kirkpatrick, D.R. Brown, Intra-abdominal free ﬂuid without solid organ injury

in blunt abdominal trauma: an indication for laparotomy, J. Trauma 52 (6) (Jun 2002) 1134–1140.

711–717.

[4] N.L. Simstein, Isolated blunt trauma injury to the hepatic duct, Int. Surg. 85 (1) (Jan-Mar 2000) 55–56.
[5] S. Garge, K.L. Narasimhan, S. Verma, V. Sekhon, Hepatic duct conﬂuence injury in blunt abdominal trauma - a diagnostic dilemma,

Ulus. Travma Acil Cerrahi Derg. = Turk. J. Trauma Emerg. Surg.: TJTES 19 (5) (Sep 2013) 480–484.

[6] D.L. Dawson, K.H. Johansen, G.J. Jurkovich, Injuries to the portal triad, Am. J. Surg. 161 (5) (May 1991) 545–551.
[7] R.R. Ivatury, M. Rohman, M. Nallathambi, P.M. Rao, Y. Gunduz, W.M. Stahl, The morbidity of injuries of the extra-hepatic biliary sys-

tem, J. Trauma 25 (10) (Oct 1985) 967–973.

[8] T.M. Zago, B.M. Pereira, T.R. Calderan, E.S. Hirano, G.P. Fraga, Extrahepatic duct injury in blunt trauma: two case reports and a lit-

erature review, Indian J. Surg. 76 (4) (Aug 2014) 303–307.

[9] E. Marzano, E. Rosso, E. Oussoultzoglou, O. Collange, P. Bachellier, P. Pessaux, Laparoscopic treatment of biliary peritonitis following

nonoperative management of blunt liver trauma, World J. Emerg. Surg.: WJES. 5 (2010) 26.

[10] V.W. Wong, A. Gee, P. Hansen, A. Michaels, Isolated avulsion of the common hepatic duct from blunt abdominal trauma, Case re-

ports in surgery2012 (2012:254563).

[11] G. D'Amata, A. Rahili, J. Habre, B. Karimdjee, F. Sanchez Bueno, A. Bourgeon, Traumatic avulsion of the intrapancreatic common bile

duct: case report, G. Chir. 27 (1-2) (Jan-Feb 2006) 27–30.

[12] K. Sondenaa, A. Horn, T. Nedrebo, Diagnosis of blunt trauma to the gallbladder and bile ducts, Eur. J. Surg. = Acta Chir. 166 (11)

(Nov 2000) 903–907.

[13] R. Balzarotti, S. Cimbanassi, O. Chiara, G. Zabbialini, C. Smadja, Isolated extrahepatic bile duct rupture: a rare consequence of blunt

abdominal trauma. Case report and review of the literature, World J. Emerg. Surg.: WJES 7 (1) (2012) 16.

[14] J.A. Rodriguez-Montes, E. Rojo, L.G. Martin, Complications following repair of extrahepatic bile duct injuries after blunt abdominal

trauma, World J. Surg. 25 (10) (Oct 2001) 1313–1316.

