Case report

A 54-year-old male competitive powerlifter with a past medical history of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and coronary artery
disease presented to our emergency department (ED) with a complaint of right greater than left lower abdominal pain. He had been
performing a back-squat with 670 lbs. when he felt a painful “pop” in his lower abdomen. He also reported experiencing urinary
urgency, frequency, and hematuria. He denied any lower extremity motor weakness or sensory changes.
On visual inspection, there was ecchymosis at the base of his penis. No obvious scrotal swelling was seen. Initial physical ex-
amination by the ED physician was positive for abdominal distension, tenderness, and guarding, but no rebound tenderness or signs
of peritonitis were elicited. A rapid bedside ultrasound examination was negative for intraperitoneal pathology. A CT angiogram of
the abdomen and pelvis was performed followed by CT urogram. Results showed widening of the pubic symphysis measuring up to
18 mm (Fig. 1A). Close review of the CT imaging demonstrated small amounts of air in both sacroiliac joints, but it was felt that the
overall stability of the pelvic ring had not been compromised and that the air may represent chronic degenerative joint changes
(Fig. 1B). There was also a large intraluminal bladder hematoma taking up over 50% of the bladder volume with contrast extra-
vasation along the right side of the retropubic space anterior to the prostate (Fig. 2).
The patient was taken to the operating room (OR) by a urologist for cystoscopy and intraluminal hematoma evacuation.
Cauterization of the bleeding was unsuccessful so the procedure was concluded and the patient was transferred to the interventional
radiology suite. An arteriogram was performed which showed active extravasation of a “replaced” or “accessory” obturator artery, an
anatomic variant of the obturator artery as a branch from the inferior epigastric artery rather than from the usual anterior division of
the internal iliac artery (Fig. 3) [4–7]. This artery was coiled and repeat arteriogram showed no further extravasation. No injury to
the internal iliac artery system was seen.
Several hours later, despite the embolization procedure and continuous bladder irrigation, the patient continued to experience
hematuria. The treatment teams decide to return to the OR for open exploration and bladder repair. A low midline incision was used
to enter the retropubic space and signiﬁcant hematoma was evacuated. A running suture was used to repair a hole in the bladder wall.
Repeat cystoscopy was performed and an additional suture was used to seal a small intraluminal leak. The retropubic space continued
to ooze blood so packing was placed around the prostate and hemostasis was achieved. A temporary abdominal closure was per-
formed with a plan to return to the OR for removal of packing material and repeat exploration.
On hospital day 3, the patient was brought back to the OR, packing material was removed, and no further bleeding was noted. At
this point, the orthopaedic trauma team was asked to re-examine his symphysis given the direct visualization of the pelvic ring
disruption. The diastasis was measured to be 30 mm using a sterile ruler so the decision was made to proceed with plate ﬁxation of
the symphysis (Fig. 4). This was accomplished with a Jungbluth clamp along the anterior surface for reduction and placement of a
Synthes 3.5 mm 6-hole pubic symphysis plate (Synthes) with 3.5 mm Bone Screw Fasteners (OsteoCentric) (Fig. 5). A medium
Hemovac drain was placed and primary closure was performed of his fascia and skin incision. Post-operatively he was allowed to
weight bear for transfers only. By 3 months following surgery, he was allowed to weight-bear as tolerated, and has gone on to do well
without any radiographic or clinical signs of implant failure.