Case report

58 years old obese lady was brought in emergency department by rescue team. She was accompanied by her son. She presented in
critical condition, was confused, tachypneic and tachycardiac. According to attendant, she was complaining for last 2–3 days of
abdominal pain, fever, decreased oral intake and decreased urination. Presently she was taking her antihypertensive medication. Few
minutes after arrival to emergency department she collapsed and was coded. She was pulseless with electrical cardiac activity (PEA).
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) was initiated according to Adult Cardiac Life Support (ACLS) protocol. Peripheral vascular
access was diﬃcult with several failed attempts. Patient was revived after 5 min of chest compression, endotracheal tube ventilation
and single shot of adrenaline. Initial investigations revealed raised WCC, CRP and very high blood glucose levels. She was previously
non-diabetic. Working diagnosis of septic shock was made. She was put on broad spectrum antibiotics which were changed according
to sensitivity report of blood and urine cultures. Femoral arterial line was used for monitoring, ﬂuid and drug administration. She was
sedated and put on invasive ventilation. She was shifted to intensive care unit for monitoring and management. She remained oliguric
despite ﬂuid replacement. Computed tomography (CT) abdomen was performed which revealed impacted proximal right ureteric
stone with dilatation of pelvicaleceal system and bi-basal lung consolidation. She was reviewed by urology team for urosepsis and JJ
stent was place to relieve the obstruction. Frack pus and old blood was drained which conﬁrmed the reason of shock to be the
urosepsis. Urine output improved but she still needed renal replacement therapy. Fever improved but it didn't touch the baseline.
Similarly WCC and CRP were showing a decreasing trend. On 6th post admission day patient regained consciousness, urine output
improved and invasive ventilatory support was withdrawn. She was transferred out of intensive care unit. She again developed high
grade fever, WCC and CRP was persistently raised. Now that patient was conscious and oriented, she started complaining of left
shoulder joint pain associated with weakness of left upper limb. Orthopedics team was asked to review the patient. On initial
examination, mild joint eﬀusion was suspected and turbid blood stained ﬂuid was aspirated. Iatrogenic skeletal injury during CPR
was suspected and radiograph was obtained which was unremarkable other than degenerative changes. Magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) scan was advised to rule out soft tissue pathology. MRI showed large eﬀusion with surrounding tissue edema, bone marrow
edema with gas formation in proximal humerus. Based on these ﬁndings MRI suggested the diﬀerential diagnoses of septic arthritis
with proximal humerus osteomyelitis, gas gangrene and sequelae of proximal humeral intraosseous line. This was something new for
the whole team. All notes were reviewed again but there was no mention of intraosseous line insertion. Resuscitation team was
contacted and inquired about the intraosseous line and they conﬁrm that intraosseous line was inserted for initial resuscitation and it
was removed when femoral arterial line was secured, but they forgot to mention it in their notes. Mystery was solved. Shoulder joint
was decompressed and washed arthroscopically. She was also diagnosed to have type II diabetes mellitus by endocrinology team and
was managed accordingly. Rest of her recovery was uneventful. She was booked by urologist for removal of stone at a later stage.