Case report

Isolated gallbladder injury, secondary to a blunt abdominal trauma, is a rare ﬁnding in children.
The presence of vague symptoms and the unknown dynamic of the trauma may increase the
diagnostic challenge especially in pediatrics.
A conservative management has been proposed in some particular cases in adults, but remains
controversial in children.
We report a case of a 5 year old boy who presented an isolated gallbladder lesion secondary to
a blunt abdominal trauma.
The surgical treatment was delayed for non-medical reasons, which gave us the possibility to
try a conservative approach.
A 5 years old boy with unremarkable previous medical history was transferred to our center, from another hospital, for the
management of a blunt abdominal trauma.
He was the victim of an accidental bicycle crush, in which he got a head trauma and the handlebars hit his epigastrium. He
was admitted to another facility 2 days before admission. A brain CT scan was done and no abnormalities were detected.
Ultrasound of the abdomen and pelvis showed the presence of free peritoneal ﬂuid, and an abdominal CT scan demonstrated a
distended gallbladder containing low-density material of mixed signal intensity consistent with blood between the internal and
external wall (Fig. 1). A laparotomy was proposed.
The parents refused to give consent to the proposed procedure and he was transferred to our hospital for further management.
At his arrival to our department, the child was suffering from diffuse abdominal pain and vomiting, without any localized ten-
derness on physical exam or abdominal distention. He was having normal bowel movement, was hemodynamically stable and
afebrile.
His laboratory tests showed the absence of anemia (Hb 12.1 g/dL, Hct 37%) or any signiﬁcant elevation of his liver and pan-
creatic function tests (ALT 47 U/L, AST 37 U/L, direct bilirubin 0.4 mg/dL, indirect bilirubin 0.9 mg/dL, amylase 34 U/L, lipase
9 U/L, ALP 135 U/L, GGT 16 U/L, normal PT and PTT).
Amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (100 mg/kg/day) was started IV (WBC 16.400/μL, N 86.1%, L 4.8%, M 8.6%, E 0%, B 0.3%, C reactive
protein 15 mg/L, procalcitonin 1.21 ng/mL).
Repeat abdominal ultrasound and CT scan conﬁrmed the presence of a dilated gallbladder with echogenic sludge and a peri-
toneal ﬂuid around the gallbladder and in the Douglas space.
MRI cholangiography showed the above ﬁndings without apparent perforation of the gallbladder (Fig. 2).
To rule out a gallbladder laceration, laparotomy and cholecystectomy were proposed. For the second time the parents refused
the operation. Since the patient was clinically stable, we elected to observe him in hospital.
On day 6 post trauma, the child was still complaining of diffuse abdominal pain. An echo-guided abdominal needle aspiration
of the peritoneal ﬂuid showed the presence of bile in the abdomen, which conﬁrmed the suspicion of gallbladder perforation.
Abdominal laparotomy was performed then, and revealed a 2 cm perforation of the posterior wall of the gallbladder with ne-
crotic edges plugged by the liver. A cholecystectomy in addition to a peritoneal cavity lavage was performed.
He was discharged on day 3 post surgery without complications.