Case presentation

The patient sustained a shrapnel injury in a local armed conﬂict in Eastern Ukraine as a result of mortaring 120-mm mines. First
aid was provided in a military ﬁeld hospital. The patient's condition was severe at admission, with a Glasgow Coma Scale score of 11.
The pupils were equal and reactive to light. The patient was breathing spontaneously, with a respiratory rate of 19 cycles/min.
Vesicular breathing was heard in the upper lung ﬁeld, which was attenuated at the left lung apex. Heart sounds were rhythmical and
muﬄed. The patient had a blood pressure of 80/60 mm Hg, and heart rate of 96 bpm. A round-shaped injury, with approximately 1-
cm diameter, with irregular edges in the left temporal region and moderate bleeding, was found. Multiple irregular-shaped injuries,
with 0.5- to 2-cm diameter, were found on the left anterolateral chest surface.
Aseptic bandages were applied, and vital functions were stabilised. The patient was transferred to a regional clinical hospital by
helicopter. Brain SCT showed a penetrating, non-perforating skull and brain injury, with entrance hole in the squamous part of the
left temporal bone. Areas of increased density of brain parenchyma were seen in the temporal lobe, along the injury canal,
represented by brain contusion and crush injury foci with haemorrhages (Fig. 1).
Chest SCT showed reduced volume of the left lung. Wedge-shaped thickening of the parenchyma of the superior lobe of the left
lung, with a wide base facing pericostal pleura, could be seen (Fig. 2).
The patient had a penetrating multifragmental craniocerebral injury with three foreign bodies of metallic density and small bone
fragments in temporal lobe parenchyma (left side), and focal temporal lobe contusions and intracerebral haematomas (left side).
Penetrating heart injury with a foreign body in the myocardium, left lung contusion and left-sided haemopneumothorax were found.
Left thoracotomy was initially performed after the SCT and diagnosis. Left ventricle injury was sutured. The superior lobe of the
left lung was subjected to atypical resection. The pleural cavity was drained. During the surgery, a penetrating injury was detected on
the posterolateral wall of the left ventricle, with a 5 × 5-mm hole. The hole was sewn with a U-shaped seam on a Teﬂon gasket. The
latter was resected instrumentally considering the perforated injury canal with a haematoma in the V lung segment. No metal
fragment was found in the pericardium or pleural cavity during the surgery.
Surgical treatment of penetrating gunshot craniocerebral injury was performed after vital function stabilisation. Intracerebral left
temporal lobe haematoma, one metal fragment and small bone fragments were removed. Damage to the MCA branches and intensive
bleeding from the left MCA branches were detected. Temporary MCA clipping and haemostasis were performed using bipolar coa-
gulation and Surgicel. No bleeding was noted after temporary clip removal. The left temporal and frontal bones (less than 9 × 10 cm)
were resected, and duraplasty was performed using autogenous tissues.
The following day after the surgery, the follow-up brain SCT showed brain matter prolapse to the craniotomy bone defect, air
along the injury channel and two foreign bodies of metallic density at the end of the injury channel (Fig. 3).
A follow-up echocardiography showed a foreign body (projectile fragment) penetrating into the depth of the left ventricle wall
(basal areas under the base of posterior mitral leaﬂet) without traumatic damage to mitral leaﬂet structures. Myocardial contractility
was preserved (Fig. 4). A follow-up electrocardiography showed subendocardial hypoxia and microfocal myocardial changes.
Due to the changes revealed by electrocardiogram and echocardiography, the patient was transported to Amosov National
Institute of Cardiovascular Surgery, Kyiv, Ukraine, for further treatment.
The patient underwent surgery to remove the foreign body from the left ventricle's myocardium. Sternotomy was performed
during the surgery, and the pericardium was opened. A CPB pump was connected. Right and partial left atriotomies were performed.
A metal fragment was found and removed from under the posterior wall of the left ventricle. The left ventricle cavity was revised. Air
embolism was prevented, and the cardiac chambers were sealed. Subsequently, heart function was restored. Haemostasis was per-
formed. The pericardium and anterior mediastinum were drained. No complications were detected in the postoperative period. The
patient was transported to a military hospital for further rehabilitation after 8 days.
A follow-up brain SCT was performed 3 months after the injury. In a non-contrast study, a 1.5 × 1-cm hyperdense focus was found
in the left temporal lobe in the burr hole. Given the shape, location and connection with the MCA, a pseudoaneurysm of the M2
segment of the left MCA was suspected (Fig. 5).
Selective cerebral angiography conﬁrmed dissectional aneurysm of the M2 segment of the left MCA, with three MCA branches
outgoing from the aneurysm to the temporal lobe, gross stenosis of M2 segment before the aneurysm (Fig. 6).
The patient underwent X-ray endovascular deconstructive exclusion of dissected M2 aneurysm (temporal branch of the left MCA)
with detachable microcoils. During temporary M2 segment occlusion, the MCA branches supplying the left temporal lobe were
retrogradely contrasted from the vertebral artery through cortical collaterals. The MCA branch supplying the superior sections of the
left temporal lobe was retrogradely contrasted from the left internal carotid artery through collaterals from the parietal MCA
branches. The patient underwent MoCA with a 4-min interval. The results were not worse than those during the preoperative tests.
Endovascular stationary aneurysm occlusion was performed with aneurysm-bearing M2 branch of the left MCA. Detachable mi-
crocoils, GDC Ultrasoft 2 mm × 6 cm and MicroPlex Helical-Soft 2 mm × 68 cm, were placed in this branch. In follow-up angio-
graphic studies, the aneurysm was not contrasted; the arteries contrasting the left temporal lobe were retrogradely contrasted
through cortical collaterals from the vertebrobasilar system and parietal left MCA branches. Postoperative follow-up MoCA showed
that the outcome did not deteriorate (Fig. 7).
No data were found conﬁrming the functioning saccular aneurysm during follow-up selective cerebral angiography 3 months after
X-ray endovascular occlusion. Blood ﬂow to all MCA branches was restored retrogradely through available cortical collaterals, except
for embolised M2 with the aneurysm (Fig. 8). After follow-up angiography, plastic surgery was performed for extensive defect of left
temporal and frontal bones by using a custom titanium plate based on stereolithographic 3D model. The patient was discharged
postoperatively for further out-patient treatment under the neuropathologist's supervision.