Case report

We report a rare case of a right orbital roof blow-in fracture in a 40-year-old male with con-
comitant basal skull fracture and intracranial hemorrhage after a fall backward. Trauma, neu-
rosurgery, ophthalmology, and maxillofacial surgery consultations were obtained. Conservative,
non-surgical management was recommended for all injuries, and outpatient follow up for orbital
fracture with no surgery oﬀered.
A 40-year-old male presented to the emergency department via EMS with hypothermia, soft tissue swelling of the posterior head,
and bilateral peri-orbital ecchymosis and edema after being found down on a cement walkway. He was found on his back at the
bottom of a short set of steps. Initial examination revealed “raccoon eyes,” bilateral periorbital edema and ecchymosis, but no
abrasion, laceration or other sign of direct trauma to the face [1]. Glasgow coma score was 14, and no neurological deﬁcit was
appreciated. The patient was intoxicated at time of presentation, blood alcohol level 0.31 g/dL, however he denied striking his face,
and recalled falling backward. There were no ﬁeld of gaze deﬁcits, no pain associated with eye movement, no gross disparity in globe
size on secondary survey. Trauma surgery and neurosurgery consultations were obtained following completion of imaging. Transfer
to a tertiary care center with ophthalmology and maxillofacial surgery was recommended and performed for management of orbital
fractures per recommendation of trauma team. Conservative, non-surgical management was recommended for all injuries, and
outpatient follow up at time of discharge for orbital fractures. The patient's hospital course was complicated by alcohol withdraw and
Clostridium diﬃcile colitis. He was discharged to a skilled nursing facility on hospital day seventeen.
Noncontrast computed tomography scan (CT) of the head demonstrated contiguous, non-displaced skull fractures involving the
left occipital bone, right parietal bone, right temporal bone and extending through the right mastoid/middle ear with extensive
intracranial hematomas overlying the superior frontal and parietal convexities (Fig. 1). In addition, there were noted subarachnoid
hemorrhages within the basal and prepontine cisterns, and scattered pneumocephalus (Fig. 2). CT scan of the head and maxillofacial
structures was obtained and compared with a study from ﬁve days prior (Fig. 3). Dedicated maxillofacial CT scan demonstrated acute,
isolated blow-in fracture of the posterior roof of the right orbit and non-displaced fracture of the left orbital roof with accompanying
orbital hematomas (Fig. 4). The zygomatic arches, pterygoid plates and temporomandibular joints were all intact.