Case report

A 57-year old male was admitted to the surgical casualty ward with severe lower abdominal pain and high
fever of 7 days in duration. His history indicated an incident of blunt trauma to lower abdomen whilst driving
a motorised trishaw. This incident had taken place 10 days prior to the admission to the hospital. His lower
abdomen had been compressed by the handlebar of the trishaw and he was admitted to emergency depart-
ment of the local hospital. Chest and pelvic X-rays and FAST (focused abdominal sonography for trauma) scan
were done and the patient was discharged with analgesics as investigations indicated that he was clinically
normal. Patient was asymptomatic for 2 days and then on the third day, he developed abdominal pain and
fever. He was readmitted to the local hospital on day 4 and was investigated for abdominal pain. On the 7th
day, he developed absolute constipation, vomiting and high fever and was transferred to the national hospital
for further management and investigation.
Upon admission, the patient had fever with chills and persistent vomiting. The patient was in septic shock
and abdominal examination revealed a distinctive palpable mass in right lower quadrant. Patient was resus-
citated with Intravenous (IV) ﬂuids and IV antibiotics were started. Routine blood samples were drawn, which
revealed signs of infection. The blood counts during the initial investigations are given: 
White blood cells: 33.4 ∗ 103/mm3
C-reactive protein: 93.7 mg/l
Deranged serum creatinine: 163 micromol/l
Clotting proﬁle: INR-1.6
Abdominal X-rays showed multiple dilated small bowel loops and contrast enhanced computed tomogra-
phy (CT) of the abdomen, revealed an ileal transection proximal to the ileocaecal junction with faecal collec-
tion (Fig. 1).
An Emergency Laparotomy was performed and an isolated ileal segment of 15 cm was found adherent to
peritoneal surface of anterior abdominal wall. This segment was detached from the ileum, 12 cm proximal to
the ileocaecal junction. There was an omental mass covered with faeces with impending entero-cutaneous
ﬁstula formation to anterior abdominal wall. The rest of the peritoneal cavity showed minimal faecal contam-
ination. The diseased segment removed and a double barrel ileostomy was made after thorough peritoneal la-
vage. The patient recovered without signiﬁcant morbidity and was discharged (How many days after? Its
more comprehensive if this is mentioned). He was then readmitted six weeks later for ileostomy reversal
and was discharged after full recovery.