Case report

A 26 year-old female involved in a head on motor vehicle collision as a restrained front seat passenger pre-
sented to our emergency department approximately 14 h after the incident complaining of severe abdominal
pain, neck pain, chest pain, and shortness of breath. The car was travelling at moderate speed (50–60 mph) at
the time of the crash. After the collision, the patient got out of the car independently, went home and slept.
Hours later, she woke up with severe abdominal pain and presented to our emergency department. She
had two episodes of non-bilious, non-bloody vomiting. There was no history of loss of consciousness. Social
history was positive for drug use with suspicion for alcohol ingestion prior to the crash, however, a blood
alcohol level was not assessed.
On examination, the patient was anxious and diaphoretic. Vital signs revealed tachycardia at
100 beats/min., but were otherwise normal. GCS score was 15/15 with no sensory or motor deﬁcits.
Abdominal examination revealed a contusion to the mid-epigastric area, and severe diffuse tenderness
with rebound and guarding especially in the epigastric area and left upper quadrant. Head and neck exami-
nation revealed midline neck tenderness, but no obvious facial trauma. Chest examination revealed right
sided tenderness with ecchymosis under the right breast, and breath sounds were normal bilaterally. Labora-
tory investigations revealed a white cell count of 12,900/mm3, haemoglobin level of 17.1 g/dL, amylase of
231, lipase of 80, and normal transaminases. Plain X-rays of the chest were negative. CT of the head and
neck were negative. CT of the abdomen and pelvis was performed and revealed large amount of free ﬂuid
in the abdomen and pelvis (Fig. 1). The density of the ﬂuid was not suggestive of blood with an attenuation
coefﬁcient of 40HU. There was no visceral injury detected and the ﬂuid source was unclear at this point.
Diagnostic laparoscopy was performed to assess the nature of the ﬂuid and revealed a large amount of old
blood in all gutters. Conversion to open laparotomy was undertaken and all gutters were packed. The small
bowel was eviscerated to assess for injury and was found to be completely transected with underlying mes-
enteric injury at the level of the proximal jejunum. No other injuries were found. Primary repair of the jejunal
transection with side-to-side anastomosis was performed with repair of the mesenteric defect. Upon revision
of the CT images postoperatively, the two ends of the transected jejunum, initially overlooked, were identiﬁed
(Fig. 2). The postoperative course was uneventful. The patient was discharged on postoperative day six and is
doing well.