Case presentation

A 22 year old male was presented to the emergency department after being found down on the road. The
time from injury to the arrival of ﬁrst responders was unknown. His Glasgow coma score (GCS) on scene was
noted to be 8; with localization of the left arm to central stimulus, incomprehensible vocal sounds, and failure
to open his eyes. We stabilized his vital signs, with no signs of hypotension or hypoxia. It was noted that he
had signiﬁcant external trauma to the face and left occiput, with scalp lacerations and arterial bleeding
from the left external auditory canal (EAC). He was transferred to the local trauma center for evaluation.
Upon arrival to the emergency department his GCS dropped over a period of 10 min to 4, with extensor
posturing of the left side. His left pupil also became ﬁxed and dilated at 8 mm. Mannitol 40 g intravenously
(IV) was administered. He was subsequently intubated and sent for computed tomography (CT) of the
brain. The non-contrast CT of the brain demonstrated a large left extra-axial hyperacute hematoma, consistent
with an EDH, with signiﬁcant midline shift and uncal herniation (Fig. 1). In addition, the CT scan displayed a
severely displaced transversely oriented fracture to the petrous temporal bone (Fig. 2A, B, and C), extending
into the carotid canal (Fig. 2D, arrow). Concerns of both injuries to the junction of the transverse-sigmoid
sinus and the petrous ICA were raised. Arterial blood continued to drain from the left EAC.
After completion of the CT brain, his examination deteriorated to become bilaterally ﬁxed and dilated. His
brainstem reﬂexes were completely absent at this point, and he was not triggering the ventilator. His pCO2
was reduced to 25 mm Hg and he was administered 60 g of mannitol, followed by 140 mL of 7.33% saline
on his way to the operating room. Given the speed of decline, we were unable to perform CT angiography
to conﬁrm suspected venous sinus or petrous ICA injuries.
Under general anesthesia, a large trauma musculocutaneous ﬂap was raised, starting from 1 cm anterior to
the tragus and continuing in a “question mark” shape to include the frontal/temporal/parietal regions of the
calvarium. This ﬂap was elevated anteriorly until the keyhole was identiﬁed. Similarly, the ﬂap was opened
inferiorly to expose the entire root of the zygoma.
The temporalis muscle was dissected off from the fractured fragments of the calvarium. At this point a
large amount of venous hemorrhage was encountered near the ﬂoor of the middle fossa, which was packed
with gel foam. The fracture fragments over the lateral cortical surface were removed, and the high speed
drill was utilized to complete a large craniectomy, exposing all of the frontal, temporal and parietal lobes of
the left hemisphere. A subtemporal decompression was performed with rongeurs.
The EDH was evacuated, revealing a large dural laceration to the cortical surface, measuring 8 cm by 6 cm
overlying the peri-Rolandic area. Hemostasis of this cortical injury was obtained with bipolar electrocautery.
Ongoing brisk venous sinus bleeding was seen from the area of the temporal fracture extending into the
asterion. The injury was inaccessible for primary repair. Attempts at packing the area failed as the pressure
required for packing led to diastases of the transverse petrous fracture and subsequent arterial bleeding
from deep within the fracture line. This likely represented the bleeding from the petrous ICA. The lateral
portion of the entire temporal bone became free ﬂoating from the remainder of the skull base.
The overall blood loss at this point was approximately 4 L from both the venous sinus and petrous ICA in-
juries. Ongoing transfusion occurred throughout the case, without any episodes of hypotension or hypoxemia.
Given the difﬁculties with controlling the hemorrhage from these two inaccessible sites, it was elected to
perform a manual reduction of the petrous temporal bone fracture, followed by lateral plating, in order to aid
with packing of the sinus injury and tamponade of the suspected petrous ICA injury.
Medially directed pressure was applied at the level of the EAC with a gloved open palm, leading the reduc-
tion of the fracture diastases in the petrous temporal bone. We were able to completely reduce the fracture
fragments, which were initially separated approximately 10–15 mm. Throughout this maneuver we ensured
that the medial pressure was as co-axial as possible, so as to prevent any further shear injury to the venous
sinus and petrous carotid artery during the reduction attempt. Hemorrhage from both the venous sinus and
petrous carotid artery decreased dramatically with this maneuver. Short titanium plates were applied across
the fracture lines, both anterior and posterior, and secured with 4 mm screws. Fixation via titanium plates and
screws occurred speciﬁcally across the spheno–squamousal suture line anterior-inferiorly via two separate
plates, and also along the mastoid–occipital suture line posterior-inferiorly utilizing a single plate (Fig. 3).
The bleeding at this point decreased signiﬁcantly, with cessation of the arterial hemorrhage deep within
the temporal bone. The plating can be seen in Fig. 3.
The residual bleeding from the venous sinus injury was subsequently packed with gel foam without
difﬁculty.
Unfortunately at this point, the entire left hemisphere appeared quite swollen and ischemic (likely from an
ICA injury). An intra-parenchymal strain gage intracranial pressure (ICP) monitor was placed and the wound
was closed, leaving the bone off. The patient was subsequently transferred to ICU.
Upon arrival in ICU, the ICP was ranging from 40 to 60 mm Hg despite maximal medical therapy. Over
the course of the following 6 h the patient developed diabetes insipidus. A CT scan of the brain demonstrated
signiﬁcant left hemispheric ischemia, contralateral hemispheric injuries, and suspected injury to the mesen-
cephalon and pons (Fig. 4). It was elected to withdrawal care. The patient died 6 h after the surgery was
completed.