Case report

A 79-year-old Caucasian woman was referred to our Level-I trauma center for management of multiple injuries following an MVC
that occurred an hour before presentation. Medical history was signiﬁcant for atrial ﬁbrillation, hypertension, coronary artery dis-
ease, and hyperlipidemia. Before arrival at our center, initial evaluation at an outside hospital noted bilateral pneumothoraces, closed
fractures involving multiple ribs and the proximal femur on the right, abrasions with ecchymosis and a left renal laceration. Despite
aggressive resuscitation, the systolic blood pressure (SBP) and Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score dropped to 90 mmHg and 14,
respectively, which led to transfer to our center for higher care.
Upon arrival at our center (2 h after MVC, which includes a 15-minute transit time), no change was noted in her orientation (GCS
still 14). Ongoing blood transfusions initiated at the referring hospital stabilized her BP at 95/70 mmHg, heart rate (HR) at 99 beats/
min, respiratory rate (RR) 24 cycles/min, with 100% oxygen saturation (SpO2). Primary trauma survey noted intact airway,
breathing and circulation, and routine labs were ordered. Cranial/cervical spinal injuries were ruled out. The patient was neuro-
vascularly intact.
Ten minutes since arrival, rapid sequence intubation with etomidate and rocuronium was performed. Drop-in BP (64/38 mmHg),
and HR (83 beats/min) occurred. Out of concern that the previously inserted right-sided chest tube was now nonfunctional, a second
chest tube was secured ipsilaterally that resulted in an immediate rush of air and prompt drainage of 50 cc of blood. The patient
remained hypotensive as IV ﬂuid bolus and transfusion of red cells continued.
Five-minutes following chest tube insertion, the patient was noted to have pulseless electrical activity (PEA). Resuscitation,
according to Advanced Cardiac Life Support (ACLS) guidelines, was initiated. After the initial 1-mg IV epinephrine, she developed
ventricular ﬁbrillation. Despite continued resuscitation eﬀorts, the patient remained in PEA. Focused echocardiography conﬁrmed no
cardiac activity. Resuscitation eﬀorts stopped after a total of 9 min. Five-minutes after termination, a repeat echocardiogram also
noted no cardiac activity, and the family was informed of the patient's demise. Approximately nine-minutes after cessation of re-
suscitation, while performing post-mortem care, a registered nurse noted respiratory eﬀorts, heard air movement through the now
detached end of the endotracheal tube, and felt a strong radial pulse [HR 132 beats/min; BP 142/79 mmHg]. Her family was
informed about the ROSC. Ten-minutes later, BP and HR decreased to 100/53 mmHg and 100beats/min, respectively. A peripheral
epinephrine drip was initiated at 0.03 μg/kg/min.
Twenty-minutes following ROSC, BP fell to 83/40 mmHg and heart rate remained constant at 100beats/min. With a bolus of
normal saline and an epinephrine drip, a rebound increase in BP (130/77 mmHg) was observed. The patient continued to remain
hemodynamically unstable. Four-hours after ROSC, a pre-emptive selective coiling and arterial gel-foam embolization of the inferior
renal pole, for a concerning local hematoma producing a tamponade eﬀect, was performed. Resuscitation attempts continued. The
INR improved from over 23 to 6.76. Acidosis continued to worsen with pH dropping to 7.12 before rebounding back to 7.2 again. By
this time, 5 units of PRBCs, 4 units of FFP, 2 platelets concentrate, and 2 l of IV ﬂuids were transfused. Her GCS continued to remain
at 3 T with no observable neurological function including negative corneal reﬂexes. Ten-hours post auto-resuscitation, the patient
developed asystole. The patient's family opted to not resuscitate, and the patient died.