Case report

A 50-year-old male presented with a painless and well-deﬁned nodule covered by intact mucosa in the anterior maxillary ves-
tibule, midline region; extending to the upper lip mucosa of at least 2-year duration (Fig. 1). The patient stated some episodes of
rupture and recurrence of the lesion with discharge of some ﬂuid. His past medical history was insigniﬁcant. A tooth-related in-
ﬂammatory process, nasolabial cyst, and a benign salivary gland-related process such as salivary duct cyst and cystadenoma were
considered as diﬀerential diagnosis. Through intra-oral examination, maxillary central incisors were found vital using vitality test and
no tooth caries or ﬁlling was noted. Radiographically, a well-deﬁned, and metal-like radiopaque object in the anterior maxilla was
observed (Fig. 2). Therefore, a working diagnosis of foreign body reaction was made. Under local anesthesia, a muco-periosteal ﬂap
was performed and after reﬂection of the ﬂap, the lesion was found completely in the soft tissue and the underlying bone was intact
without involvement. The lesion appeared as a cyst-like structure grossly, containing amber-colored ﬂuid. After drainage the ﬂuid,
the nodule was completely excised. The specimen was placed in 10% buﬀered formalin solution and submitted for histopathologic
studies. Grossly, the specimen demonstrated partially ruptured, cyst-like features, with a thick wall measuring 1.2 cm. A dark silver-
gray metal object measuring 0.5 cm with corroded surface was retrieved from the specimen (Fig. 3a).
Histopathologically, a cyst-like structure with an inﬂamed thick ﬁbrous wall was noted. No epithelial lining was evident, and the
luminal surface of the specimen exhibited synovial metaplasia-like change predominantly composed of eosinophilic epithelioid cells
with distinct cytoplasmic border intermixed with ﬁbroblast-like cells. A patchy lymphohistiocytic inﬁltrate and hemorrhage were also
seen throughout the ﬁbrous wall (Figs. 3b and 3c). Immunohistochemically, CD163 highlighted the histiocytes (Fig. 3d). Using
polarized light, scattered refractile particulate foreign material was found both in the cystic space and in the ﬁbrous wall. Collec-
tively, a diagnosis of foreign material and associated cyst-like foreign body granulomatous reaction was made. Considering the
patient's history of an injury caused by the explosion took place in the Iran-Iraq war in 30 years ago and history of some surgical
attempts for removing some shrapnel from his body, the source of that foreign object was suggested. Post-operatively, in a 4-year
clinical follow up, the patient showed no evidence of infection and recurrence.