Case Report

A 28-year-old otherwise healthy male sustained two stab wounds to the right chest. The Care Flight Rapid Response Helicopter
(CRRH) staﬀed by a retrieval physician and advanced care paramedic was airborne 3 min after notiﬁcation. The Team was at the
patient 21 min later. At initial assessment the patient was pale and diaphoretic. A systolic blood pressure (BP) of 70 mmHg, heart rate
(HR) 136, respiratory rate (RR) of 30, SpO2 of 100% on room air and Glasgow coma scale (GCS) of 14.
Intravenous (IV) access obtained. The physician performed an extended focused assessment with sonography for trauma (EFAST).
A large pericardial eﬀusion was observed with features of tamponade including right ventricular systolic collapse, right atrial dia-
stolic collapse and a distended inferior vena cava (IVC). A decision was made to transport immediately by air (see also Fig. 1).
The team departed with patient 17 min after arrival. 1 unit of red cell concentrate (RCC) and 500 mL of crystalloid were ad-
ministered. The receiving Major Trauma Centre was advised of the EFAST ﬁndings. The receiving Cardiothoracic Service and
Operating Theatre (OT) were prepared for patient arrival. The local Massive Transfusion Protocol (MTP) was activated. During ﬂight
a further 120 mL RCC was transfused and the patient received 1 g of IV Tranexamic Acid (TXA).
After a 20 min ﬂight the patient was met on the helipad by the Trauma Team Leader and transported directly to the OT. He
arrived in theatre 37 min after patient contact with Retrieval team from a distance of 84 km by direct ﬂight. Emergency Sternotomy
and mini thoracotomy revealed a left lower chest wound penetrating the chest wall with entry into the LV myocardium and a ﬁve-
millimetre wound lateral and distal to the Left Anterior Descending Coronary Artery with active bleeding. There was also a 500 mL
haemothorax in the left thoracic cavity. These injuries were surgically repaired. The patient was extubated immediately post op-
eratively, discharged from intensive care the following day, and made a full recovery.