Trauma Case Reports 1 (2015) 95–98

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Trauma Case Reports

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : h t t p : / / w w w . j o u r n a l s . e l s e vi e r . c o m /

t r a u m a - c a s e - r e p o r t s /

Case Report
Penetrating cardiac trauma and the use of emergent
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation and therapeutic
hypothermia: When cooler heads prevail
Nathaniel Lee ⁎, Daniel Tang, Sudha Jayaraman

Virginia Commonwealth University Department of Surgery, Richmond, VA, United States

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Accepted 19 October 2015
Available online 27 November 2015

Keywords:
Penetrating cardiac trauma
ECMO
Therapeutic hypothermia
Neuroprotection

Background and case

This is a case of penetrating chest trauma with traumatic arrest from
cardiac tamponade, right and left ventriculotomies, mitral valve injury
and ventricular septal defect. Patient underwent resuscitative thoracot-
omy converted to clamshell thoracotomy for haemorrhage control.
Ventriculotomies were repaired on initial damage control operation.
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation cannulation and therapeutic
cooling bridged to deﬁnitive cardiac repair several days later. Patient
was discharged to an inpatient rehabilitation facility in 16 days.

© 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access
article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Whilst extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) has been used for temporising patients with
cardiac injuries, the most common indications for ECMO in the literature are lung injury and acute respi-
ratory distress syndrome [1]. Therapeutic cooling for neuroprotection has become standard in the setting
of cardiac arrest, but this practise has not expanded into patients after traumatic arrest [2]. This case
describes an instance of major penetrating cardiac injury managed with ECMO and therapeutic cooling.
(See Figs. 1– 3.)

This 28 year old man was brought to a level one trauma centre after being stabbed in the chest. He was
found in pulseless electrical activity and treated with 10 to 20 min of CPR and three rounds of epinephrine
whilst en route. On trauma evaluation, he had a stab wound to the left chest with no pulse. A resuscitative tho-
racotomy and pericardiotomy were performed revealing minimal blood in the left chest, but a large amount of

⁎ Corresponding author at: VCU Dept of Surgery, P.O. Box 980135, Richmond, VA 23298-0454, United States.

E-mail address: nathaniel.lee@vcuhealth.org (N. Lee)

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tcr.2015.10.011
2352-6440/© 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

96

N. Lee et al. / Trauma Case Reports 1 (2015) 95–98

Fig. 1. Haemorrhage from the right ventriculotomy is controlled with gentle traction via a Foley catheter as the internal mammary arteries
are ligated.

dark blood in the pericardium. The patient had return of spontaneous circulation. The incision was extended
to a clamshell thoracotomy, allowing the identiﬁcation of an actively haemorrhaging right ventricular injury.
This was occluded with direct pressure until a Foley catheter was placed through the ventriculotomy and in-
ﬂated (Fig. 1), allowing for haemostatic resuscitation and transfer to the operating room. Estimated downtime
was approximately 20–25 min.

Fig. 2. CT angiogram demonstrates the ventricular septal defect prior to surgical repair.

N. Lee et al. / Trauma Case Reports 1 (2015) 95–98

97

Fig. 3. The ventricular septal defect and mitral valve injury are inspected through atriotomies prior to repair.

In the operating room, the right ventriculotomy was closed with pledgeted prolene sutures and the Foley
was removed. At this time, the patient remained hypotensive. A transesophageal echo (TEE) revealed a trau-
matic ventricular septal defect (VSD) and mitral valve injury (Fig. 2). A cardiac surgeon was called into the
case. A left ventriculotomy was identiﬁed and also repaired with pledgeted prolene. Immediate cardiac recon-
struction was considered, however the patient was acidotic, coagulopathic, and hypothermic. His neurologic
status was unclear and we could not be sure that he would physiologically tolerate a complex cardiac opera-
tion immediately. The patient was placed on veno-arterial ECMO via aortic root and femoral vein cannulation
to rest the heart and give the patient time to declare survivability. His chest was packed and he was trans-
ferred to the cardiothoracic surgery intensive care unit (CSICU) for further resuscitation and ECMO therapy.
At the conclusion of the case, the patient had lost an estimated 10 l of blood, and received 14 units of packed
red cells, 10 units of plasma, and three doses of platelets.

In the CSICU, therapeutic hypothermia was initiated to support neurologic recovery. Over the following
24 h, he needed aggressive resuscitation with blood products, receiving a total of ﬁve units of packed red
cells, ﬁve units of plasma, four doses of platelets, and ﬁve doses of cryoprecipitate. Considering this require-
ment, his chest was re-explored in the CSICU to control any surgical bleeding. Minor bleeding was noted
from the chest wall musculature, but the right and left ventricle repairs were intact and haemostatic.

The patient stabilised enough to permit CT evaluation, which was obtained on post-operative day (POD)
two. No additional injuries were identiﬁed on CT head, chest, and abdomen/pelvis. An EGD, performed to eval-
uate for esophageal injury, also revealed no abnormality. A continuous 24 hour EEG was performed which re-
vealed generalised slowing, attributed to sedation. On POD three, the patient was able to follow simple
commands during a sedation holiday.

Based on isolated cardiac wounds and reasonable neurologic function, deﬁnitive cardiac repair was
planned. On POD four, the patient underwent repair of the ventricular septal defect, mitral valve, and pericar-
dium, as well as ECMO decannulation. The 2.2 cm VSD in the perimembranous region was closed with prolene
reinforced with autologous pericardium. The mitral valve was noted to have a 1.5 cm oblique defect that was
repaired with prolene and reinforced with an A3–P3 commissuroplasty. Once the atriotomies were closed, the
patient was rewarmed, reperfused, and weaned from bypass; TEE revealed normal systolic function, no appar-
ent ventricular shunt, and adequate mitral function. The pericardium was then reconstructed with synthetic
pericardial membrane (Fig. 3).

Postoperatively, he developed MSSA pneumonia with hypotension but was effectively treated with anti-
biotics. He was extubated on POD9/5 and transitioned to oral diet by POD 11/7. He was discharged to inpatient
rehabilitation on POD 18/14 and was discharged home after four days. At the time of discharge home, he was
cognitively intact (GCS 15) and independently completing activities of daily living and walking without assis-
tive devices.

Two weeks after discharge, he denied any cognitive or motor difﬁculties, but did report paresthesias in bi-
lateral ﬁngers and toes. At four weeks, he again complained of paresthesias, but had no other complaints. After

98

N. Lee et al. / Trauma Case Reports 1 (2015) 95–98

four months, his ﬁnger paresthesias had resolved, though his toe paresthesias persisted. He had returned to
work as a roofer without any limitations.

Discussion

From the onset, the odds were against a favourable outcome for this patient. His mechanism alone put him
at 35% risk of death [3]. Presenting in traumatic arrest increased this risk to approximately 80% [3]. Rapidly
intervening with a resuscitative thoracotomy, relieving the pericardial tamponade and restoring circulation
after 20 min left him at great risk of debilitating anoxic brain injury. In order to maximise the likelihood of
a meaningful recovery, we elected to place him on ECMO and induce therapeutic hypothermia.

Our management strategy hinged on the availability and utilisation of ECMO, which allowed for delayed
repair of the VSD and valvular injuries. This permitted us to ensure evidence of neurologic function and inves-
tigate for additional injuries whilst preventing cardiogenic shock. There have been very few reports of ECMO
use for traumatic cardiac injuries [4] although, ARDS remains a well-recognised indication in trauma patients
[1]. The most common complication associated with ECMO is bleeding, which occurs in up to 68% of patients
[1], a risk that could be compounded by therapeutic hypothermia.

Induced hypothermia has slowly gained traction and become a standard practise for neuroprotection in
cases of non-traumatic cardiac arrest, and has been incorporated into ACLS protocol [5]. Several studies
have indicated signiﬁcant outcome beneﬁts including survival and increased likelihood of good neurologic re-
covery when used in the medical post-cardiac arrest setting [6]. Bernard et al. demonstrated that the likeli-
hood of discharge to home or to rehab after therapeutic hypothermia was ﬁve times greater than without it
[7]. However, there has been reluctance to adopt these manoeuvres in trauma patients, often citing the
risks of hypothermic coagulopathy [2]. One ongoing clinical trial is evaluating use of rapid induction of hypo-
thermia, resuscitative surgery and resuscitation with cardiopulmonary bypass in trauma patients, suggesting
this attitude is evolving [8].

This case demonstrates the utility of ECMO and therapeutic hypothermia in maximising clinical outcomes
in patients sustaining cardiac arrest from penetrating cardiac injury. This patient had excellent recovery be-
cause of the availability and immediate use of these interventions for a rare indication. However, the risks
of haemorrhage are substantial and may be compounded with this approach, especially if it results in a neu-
rologic “second-hit” for the patient which is associated with 150% increase in mortality in the setting of brain
trauma [9]. Whilst more research is necessary to determine which patients may beneﬁt from these interven-
tions, this case demonstrates the feasibility of using ECMO and therapeutic hypothermia in patients having
post-traumatic cardiac arrest.

Conﬂict of interest

The authors of this case report have no conﬂicts of interest to disclose.

References

[1] T. Pranikoff, R.B. Hirschl, C.N. Steimle, H.L. Anderson, R.H. Bartlett, Efﬁcacy of extracorporeal life support in the setting of adult car-

diorespiratory failure, ASAIO J. 40 (1994) M339–M343.

[2] M.A. Tuma, L.G. Stansbury, D.M. Stein, K.A. McQuillan, T.M. Scalea, Induced hypothermia after cardiac arrest in trauma patients: a

[3] J.A. Asensio, J.D. Berne, D. Demetriades, L. Chan, J. Murray, A. Falabella, et al., One hundred ﬁve penetrating cardiac injuries: a 2-year

case series, J. Trauma 71 (2011) 1524–1527.

prospective evaluation, J. Trauma 44 (1998) 1073–1082.

[4] G. Gatti, G. Forti, A. Bologna, G. Sagrati, G. Gustin, R. Korcova, et al., Rescue extracorporeal membrane oxygenation in a young man

with a stab wound in the chest, Injury 45 (2014) 1509–1511.

[5] M.A. Peberdy, C.W. Callaway, R.W. Neumar, R.G. Geocadin, J.L. Zimmerman, M. Donnino, et al., Part 9: post-cardiac arrest care: 2010
American Heart Association Guidelines for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and Emergency Cardiovascular Care, Circulation 122
(2010) S768–S786.

[6] Group HaCAS, Mild therapeutic hypothermia to improve the neurologic outcome after cardiac arrest, N. Engl. J. Med. 346 (2002) 549–556.
[7] S.A. Bernard, T.W. Gray, M.D. Buist, B.M. Jones, W. Silvester, G. Gutteridge, et al., Treatment of comatose survivors of out-of-hospital

cardiac arrest with induced hypothermia, N. Engl. J. Med. 346 (2002) 557–563.

[8] Pittsburgh Uo, Emergency preservation and resuscitation for cardiac arrest from trauma, ClinicalTrials.gov [Internet], National
Library of Medicine (US), Bethesda (MD), 2002 ([cited 2014 Mar 31]. Available from: http://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT01042015).
[9] R.M. Chesnut, L.F. Marshall, M.R. Klauber, B.A. Blunt, N. Baldwin, H.M. Eisenberg, et al., The role of secondary brain injury in deter-

mining outcome from severe head injury, J. Trauma 34 (1993) 216–222.

