Case Report

A 61-year-old female with no signiﬁcant past medical history presented to an another hospital after she was the restrained driver
in a motor vehicle collision. She complained of mild to moderate sharp pain in her left chest and hip, as well as shortness of breath.
On exam she demonstrated stable vital signs, regular rate and had left rib tenderness and left pelvic and sacral tenderness. Evaluation,
including pan CT scanning, revealed fractures of the left sacral ala and left superior and inferior pubic rami. Her injuries were deemed
non-operative and she was admitted for pain control and physical therapy for 4 days, and then discharged home.
One month after discharge she re-presented with worsening left chest pain, shortness of breath, dizziness and fatigue. New
imaging revealed an anterior diaphragmatic rupture with herniation of transverse colon and omentum into the left hemithorax with
mass eﬀect on the anterior heart (Fig. 1), a moderate to large layering left pleural eﬀusion with near complete atelectasis of the left
lower lobe and a subacute minimally displaced manubrium fracture. She was transferred to our hospital, for further management.
Upon arrival to our hospital she was tachycardic and diaphoretic with decreased left breath sounds and left upper quadrant
tenderness. We opted to take her emergently to the operating room for operative reduction of the hernia and repair of diaphragmatic
defect. At exploration, the entire transverse colon and omentum were eviscerated through a large defect in the anterior portion of her
diaphragm and into her pericardium. The undamaged heart was visible through the defect. There was also a lateral pericardial defect,
through which the hernia contents traveled out of the pericardium and further into the left chest. We were able to easily reduce the
hernia contents, the transverse colon and omentum. We repaired the open pericardial and diaphragmatic defect and were able to
achieve good tension-free approximation. There were no other injuries.
Postoperatively she had intermittent episodes of atrial ﬁbrillation, which was controlled with low dose metoprolol. She was
discharged to home on postoperative day 5 on metoprolol, without complications.