Case report

A 16 year old male fell down while cycling and was brought to the trauma centre after 4 h with closed injury to his left upper limb.
On clinical examination, there was abnormal mobility and crepitus in his left forearm and elbow appeared dislocated. Radial pulse
was palpable and there was no neurological deficit. Radiographs showed a transcondylar fracture dislocation (posadas fracture) with
fracture line extending into the articular surface of lateral condyle and associated radius fracture and segmental ulna fracture (Figs. 1-2). 
Patient was taken to operating room and the fracture site was exposed through posterior triceps elevating approach. Anatomical
reduction of articular fragments was achieved and stabilised with bicolumnar plating. Elbow was grossly unstable with avulsion of
both medial and lateral collateral ligaments from the humeral side and avulsion of anterior capsule from the coronoid. Both medial
and lateral collateral ligaments were repaired with transosseous suturing technique and anterior capsule was reattached with the help
of lasso sutures. No.2 non absorbable sutures were used for the repair of both collateral ligaments and anterior capsule. After the
repair of ligaments and capsule , elbow was stable and wound was closed in layers. Posterior splint was given with elbow in 90 degree
of flexion and mid prone position. After subsidance of swelling, the forearm fractures were reduced and internally fixed with limited
contact dynamic compression plating (Figs. 3-4). Postoperative period was uneventful and patient was discharged after one week.
Posterior splint was removed after one week and ROM brace was applied with 30 degree extension block. Patient was encouraged to
do active ROM exercises for 4 weeks, followed by active assisted exercises for next 6 weeks under the supervision of a therapist.
Patient was serially followed up for upto 1 year and after 1 year, the patient was pain free with ROM of 0 degree to 120 degree flexion
and has resumed his previous activity levels (Figs. 5-8).