Case report

A 79-year-old man was brought to the emergency room for abdominal pain. He slipped down two days prior to admission. He
complained of generalized abdominal tenderness, but no rebound tenderness. Abdominal rigidity was noted on physical examination.
The blood pressure was 119/87 mm Hg, and pulse rate was 87 beats/min. He was admitted 3 months prior due to multiple rib
fractures with hemothorax on the right after vehicular accident, computed tomography (CT) showed no evidence of any vascular
anomaly or vasculitis at that time. Laboratory studies during the present admission showed thrombocytopenia and platelet dys-
function, due to transient bone marrow depression and chronic liver disease. CT showed moderate amount of hemoperitoneum with
suspicious contrast leakage from the left gastric artery and left gastroepiploic artery (Fig. 1A). His hemoglobin and hematocrit levels
were 7.6 g/dl and 22.1%, respectively. Because vital sign was stable, angioembolization was planned; the angiography showed no
evidence of active bleeding from the celiac trunk, gastroduodenal artery, and left gastric artery (Fig. 1B). Conservative management,
including absolute bed rest, hemostatic, agents and transfusion, was applied to keep the vital signs stable. Follow up CT showed a
0.5 cm pseudoaneurysm of the left gastric artery and no evidence of active bleeding 4 days post-admission (6 days post-trauma)
(Fig. 2A, B). Angioembolization for the pseudoaneurysm of the left gastric artery was planned. Angiography revealed the left gastric
artery arising from the aorta. Selective injection of the left gastric artery revealed multiple pseudoaneurysms with extravasation along
the lesser curvature of the stomach (Fig. 3A). Superselective catheterization of the vessel allowed embolization with microcoils.
Postembolization angiography revealed no further pseudoaneurysm or extravasation (Fig. 3B).
The patient was discharged 10 days at post-admission without any problems. One month post-trauma, follow-up CT showed no
evidence of contrast leakage or aneurysm of the celiac trunk and left gastric artery (Fig. 3C, D).