Trauma Case Reports 5 (2016) 7–12

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Trauma Case Reports

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e vi e r . c o m / l o c a t e / t c r

Case Report
Post-traumatic pancreatico-dural ﬁstula: Case report and
management challenges☆
Antonio W. Tarabay a,⁎,1, Alda Rocca a,1, David Martin b, Tobias Zingg b,
Nermin Halkic b, Marc Leviver a, Roy T. Daniel a
a Neurosurgery Division, Neurosciences Department, CHUV (Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois), UNIL University, Lausanne, Switzerland
b Visceral Surgery Department, CHUV (Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois), UNIL University, Lausanne, Switzerland

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Accepted 2 September 2016
Available online 20 September 2016

Keywords:
Pacreatico-dural
Fistula
Trauma
Management

Pancreatic injury can occur following high-energy blunt trauma to the
torso. Although several types of pancreatic ﬁstulas have been described
in literature, we report to our knowledge, the ﬁrst case of a pancreatico-
dural ﬁstula of traumatic origin.
A 20-year-old male sustained a severe blow to the thoraco-abdominal
region in the setting of a motorcycle accident. A total body scan revealed
an AAST (American Association for the Surgery of Trauma) grade 4
splenic injury. A laparotomy with splenectomy and abdominal packing
was performed. This was later followed by thoracolumbar instrumenta-
tion for posterior ﬁxation of a T11–T12 transdiscal type C fracture with
anterior subluxation of T11, according to the AO classiﬁcation.
Subsequent management was complicated by the persistence of a
pseudomeningocele despite multiple surgical drainage procedures and
a concomitant increase in retroperitoneal ﬂuid collections. High levels
of amylase and lipase in the pseudomeningocele ﬂuid conﬁrmed the
presence of a pancreatico-dural ﬁstula, due to a Wirsung duct rupture.
This case report illiustrates the challenges in the management of this
rare condition.

© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access
article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

☆ Nothing to be disclosed.
⁎ Corresponding author at: Service de Neurochirurgie, Département de Neuroscience Clinique, BH13, CHUV, 1011, Lausanne, Vaud,

Suisse, Switzerland.

E-mail address: antonio.tarabay@chuv.ch (A.W. Tarabay).

1 Antonio Tarabay and Alda Rocca are co-ﬁrst authors.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tcr.2016.09.002
2352-6440/© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

8

Introduction

A.W. Tarabay et al. / Trauma Case Reports 5 (2016) 7–12

Pancreatico-dural ﬁstula has not been previously reported in the literature. It is due to the rupture of the
pancreatic duct, which results in the leakage of proteolytic secretions into the retroperitoneal space. In case of
a concomitant spinal injury with a cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) leak, a ﬁstulous connection may develop between
the two compartments. The recognition of this complication may be delayed, with potentially severe
consequences.

Case report

A 20 year old male patient was involved in a motor vehicle accident, driving at a speed of 60 km/h, with
resultant severe and diffuse trauma to the abdomen, trunk and extremities. The patient was wearing protec-
tive clothing. He was rescued by an experienced air ambulance team and arrived at the emergency depart-
ment with unstable vital signs, ﬂaccid paraplegia with a cord level at T10 and a complete loss of voluntary
control over bowel and bladder function. The FAST examination was negative. A total body CT revealed mul-
tiple rib fractures, bilateral hemothoraces, and hemoperitoneum with AAST grade 4 splenic injury [1]. He also
had left-sided renal and adrenal injury, in addition to a right-sided scapular fracture. Spinal CT imaging
showed a transdiscal AO type C fracture with bilateral facet subluxation of T11 over T12 [2]. The
pneumothoraces were drained through chest tubes. An exploratory laparotomy was performed because of
hemodynamic instability, and a splenectomy was performed. The left retroperitoneal space was packed due
to the presence of a large retroperitoneal hematoma and known kidney and adrenal injuries. “Damage
Control” type surgery, without thorough exploration of the pancreas, was performed, due to the patient's
compromised physiological status, and no other lesions were identiﬁed at that time.

The patient was then transferred to the Intensive Care Unit for close monitoring. On post-admission day
(PAD) 1, MRI of the spine was performed, showing the subluxation of T11 over T12, with an associated rup-
ture of the intervertebral disc and the posterior longitudinal ligament. In addition, it revealed a 9 mm-thick
epidural hematoma overlying the posterior wall of T11, associated with a medullary contusion at the level
of T11–T12 (Fig. 1B).

On PAD 2, spinal surgery was performed, with reduction of the subluxation and trans-pedicular screw
ﬁxation from T9 to L2. An intra-operative post-traumatic dural tear was suspected, because of a small leak
of CSF, but no repair was attempted because of the impossibility to clearly identify the site of leakage. The
liquid was apparently clear and colourless. On PAD 3, a planned second look laparotomy was performed
and after depacking, no bleeding was observed, with persistence of the retroperitoneal hematoma. A small

Fig. 1. Sagittal CT (A) and MRI (B) images showing the anterior translation of T11 over T12 associated with signiﬁcant narrowing of the
canal diameter at this level. There is also an epidural hematoma located posterior to T11. Image C shows the reduction and posterolateral
arthrodesis that was performed.

A.W. Tarabay et al. / Trauma Case Reports 5 (2016) 7–12

9

Fig. 2. A: AAST grade 3 pancreatic injury (white arrow). B: ERCP with contrast extravasation showing the location of the ﬁstula at the
body/tail junction (black arrow). Stenting of the main pancreatic duct with a plastic prosthesis from the duodenum to the pancreatic
tail was performed.

amount of turbid liquid was identiﬁed, but no lesions were found after inspecting the small intestine and
colon.

Over the following days, the patient complained of intense back pain that was not responsive to opiates.
He experienced hallucinations, became agitated and developed a septic state. A thoracolumbar MRI and a
thoraco-abdominal CT were performed, showing large bilateral para-vertebral and retroperitoneal ﬂuid
collections. They also revealed a AAST grade 3 pancreatic injury, which was retrospectively already present
on the initial CT, but not recognized at that time [3]. The patient was taken back to the operating room for
revision of the thoraco-lumbar wound. During surgery, a CSF leak from a circular dural breach at the level
of the previous subluxation was identiﬁed. The breached area was then repaired with a ﬁbrin sealant (Tisseel,
Baxter International Inc.), along with debridement of necrotic tissue and drainage of newly purulent collec-
tions. This was followed by copious irrigation with normal saline and tight closure of the facia and subcutane-
ous tissue. Two Penrose drains were left in the superﬁcial layers. The retroperitoneal ﬂuid collections were
evacuated by percutaneous CT-guided placement of a drain. The blood cultures, paravertebral and abdominal
ﬂuid collections were all positive for Enterobacter cloacae. Intravenous antibiotic treatment with Meropenem
was instituted. Despite all interventions, the paravertebral and abdominal collections increased and repeat
cultures remained positive for Enterobacter cloacae. The paravertebral collections exteriorized through the
dorsal skin across three new locations other than the incision.

Serum amylase and lipase were measured high up to 3 times the standard norm from the trauma day up to
1 week, then the values returned to baseline (standard norm respectively 13–53 U/l and 13 60 U/l). High
levels of amylase (12′716 U/I) and lipase (72′610 U/I) were also found upon chemical analysis of the dorsal
spinal ﬂuid collections. In order to treat the pancreatic leak, an ERCP was performed, with placement of a

Fig. 3. A: Retroperitoneal (black arrow) and paravertebral (white arrow) collections before placement of the pancreatic duct stent. B: CT at
7 months follow-up showing complete resolution of the pseudomeningocele and the intra-abdominal collections.

10

A.W. Tarabay et al. / Trauma Case Reports 5 (2016) 7–12

stent bridging the defect of the main duct, located in the body of the pancreas (see Fig. 2). The patient required
a reoperation for debridement and drainage of the recurrent paravertebral collection and reapplication of a
layer of ﬁbrin sealant over the dural breach.

The patient was initially exclusively fed by total parenteral nutrition for a period of 15 days. Subcutanous
somatostatine was introduced for a period of 7 days (0.1 mg tid), as an adjunct to proton pump inhibitors, to
minimize pancreatic secretions. A progressive enteral feeding by naso-jejunal tube in addition to parenteral
alimentation was continued for 7 days. The patient could then gradually be orally fed and enteral and paren-
teral nutritional intake could be weaned off. Over the following weeks, the patient's general condition slowly
improved, with progressive resolution of all ﬂuid collections on serial follow-up CT. The drains were removed
and the patient transferred to a rehabilitation facility on PAD 52, with a neurologic status of complete paraple-
gia and a sensory level at T10. Antibiotic treatment was given for a total of 7 months till the CT showed
complete resolution of the collections in the spinal and retroperitoneal spaces (Fig. 3B).

Discussion

Intraabdominal injury is present in almost 50% of patients with thoracolumbar fractures [4]. The main
associated lesions are hollow viscus and mesenteric injuries, followed by solid organ injury, resulting from
rapid deceleration with resultant shearing stress. An important predictor for the presence of a signiﬁcant
abdominal injury is the combination of a thoracolumbar fracture and an abdominal wall ecchymosis
(“seatbelt sign”).

Pancreatic injury has been reported to occur in only 1–5% of patients with blunt trauma, but is associated
with a high morbidity (30–62%) and mortality (10–30%) [5]. Injury to the main pancreatic duct occurs in up to
15% of pancreatic trauma. Only 3.6% of patients with injury to the main duct will eventually develop a pancre-
atic ﬁstula [6]. The diagnosis is difﬁcult and delay in treatment is therefore frequent [7]. A normal serum lipase
result can be a useful adjunct to exclude pancreatic injury. A positive lipase result, regardless of the cut-off
used, is not reliably associated with pancreatic trauma, and should not be used to guide assessment [8]. The
part of the pancreas usually injured is situated to the left of the superior mesenteric vessels [9]. Different
types of pancreatic ﬁstulae have been described, including communication with peritoneal, pleural, pericardi-
al and ureteral epithelium [10–13]. In this report, we describe the ﬁrst case of pancreatico-dural ﬁstula. If
there is complete disruption of all elements of the spinal column and the posterior abdominal wall, as in
our case, the retroperitoneal space becomes continuous with the spinal compartment. With a concomitant
injury to the main pancreatic duct, leakage of proteolytic enzymes into the spinal canal becomes thus possible
and a pancreatico-dural ﬁstula can develop. A possible reason why this speciﬁc complication had not been
previously reported could be the fact that the severity of the trauma leading to these ruptures is of such inten-
sity that patients either do not survive or have a poor outcome despite a correct diagnosis. It may therefore
occur publication bias, with unpublished negative results.

Pancreatic ﬁstulae can be managed in different ways. The non-operative management involves image-
guided drainage, ﬂuid management and nutritional support. In a prospective study, 90% of post-traumatic
pancreatic ﬁstulae closed spontaneously in less than a month with this approach [14]. ERCP is the most
sensitive modality for detecting pancreatic ductal injury by showing extravasation of contrast medium
from the duct system [15]. The procedure can also be therapeutic and pancreatic duct stenting may be
attempted to redirect secretions and “dry out” the ﬁstula. In a Finnish retrospective study, the success
rate of pancreatic ﬁstula closure after therapeutic ERCP was 82% [16]. Finally, surgical treatment is used
as last resort when all radio-interventional and conservative attempts fail. The approach depends on the
location of the breach in the pancreatic duct. In case of injury to the body or tail, a distal pancreatectomy
may be considered [17]. If the pancreatic head is involved, the safest option is an external drainage.
Pancreticoduodenectomy is indicated only if massive lesions involving the pancreas, the duodenum and the
common bile duct are present [9].

The patient at discharge had a stable neurological exam with a sensory level of T10. The fact that the dam-
age to the spinal cord didn't extend upward was intriguing. We don't have actually a clear explanation. It
might be that the pancreatic secretions were mainly concentrated around the paravertebral space, and that
the continuous ﬂow of CSF had a washing and dilution effect near the spinal cord that prevented further
damage.

A.W. Tarabay et al. / Trauma Case Reports 5 (2016) 7–12

11

This case report emphasizes the importance of the normal anatomic barriers. The severe trauma caused a
breach in the main pancreatic duct and a disruption of the para-vertebral soft-tissues, with subsequent devel-
opment of a communication between the retroperitoneal and epidural spaces. The proteolytic nature of the
pancreatic secretions may have contributed to the development and progression of the ﬁstulous connection.
In our case, the presence of pancreatic secretions and thus proteolytic digestion might have in retrospect been
recognized earlier, since the posterior efﬂuents were turbid, CSF being universally clear in appearance. But the
presence of infection made the differentiation difﬁcult, it was only when the secretions eroded through the
skin when we started searching for alternative hypothesis. At this time the possibility of an underlying ﬁstula
with the pancreatic secretions was evoked. Indeed the review of the initial CT scan conﬁrmed the pancreatic
inury, as well as the analysis of the chemical contents of the secretions. Thorough exploration of the pancreas
must hence be performed during any trauma laparotomy in order not to miss or delay any signiﬁcant injury
by exposure through the lesser omentum.

CT is currently the imaging modality of choice for pancreatic injury, although the reported sensitivity in
detecting pancreatic injury is low, in the range of 47–60% [17]. It is imperative for radiologists to be vigilant
for these injuries. Findings of pancreatic trauma on CT are often nonspeciﬁc, and high levels of clinical suspi-
cion and understanding of mechanism of injury are important. Familiarity with the grading schemes of
pancreatic injury is mandatory because they may directly inﬂuence management [18].

Underlying explanation should be searched in patients who have an atypical course following early surgi-
cal treatment of spinal and abdominal trauma. Although having pancreatic secretions within the pseudo-
meningocele was something we do not think of, the behaviour of the post-operative paravertebral and
retroperitoneal collections were very atypical. There was also subsequent formation of conduits from the
paravertebral space up across the facia, subcutaneous layers and eventually through the skin. The ability to
diagnose the ﬁstula clinically led to the performance of an ERCP, and subsequently the deﬁnitive treatment
through the stenting of the duct of Wirsung. Once the pancreatic duct breach was diagnosed and managed,
the ﬁstula gradually resolved without the need for further interventions.

Conclusion

Pancreatico-dural ﬁstula is a rare entity and can have serious complications. A high index of suspicion is
necessary to diagnose this condition and should be considered in the setting of a combination of spinal
(thoracolumbar) and abdominal trauma, especially when the clinical course is atypical in the post-operative
phase. A multidisciplinary approach is clearly required, including surgeons, gastroenterologists and radiolo-
gists, so as not to miss initial lesions. Treatment needs to be adapted based on the exact sites of the trauma
and the anatomical barriers that have been breached. Prompt identiﬁcation and adequate multidisciplinary
management could result in a good outcome.

Conﬂict of interest

The authors certify that they have NO afﬁliations with or involvement in any organization or entity with
any ﬁnancial interest (such as honoraria; educational grants; participation in speakers’ bureaus; membership,
employment, consultancies, stock ownership, or other equity interest; and expert testimony or patent-licens-
ing arrangements), or non-ﬁnancial interest (such as personal or professional relationships, afﬁliations,
knowledge or beliefs) in the subject matter or materials discussed in this manuscript.

References

[1] E.E. Moore, T.H. Cogbill, G.J. Jurkovich, S.R. Shackford, M.A. Malangoni, H.R. Champion, Organ injury scaling: spleen and liver (1994

revision), J. Trauma 38 (3) (1995 Mar) 323–324.

[2] A.R. Vaccaro, C. Oner, C.K. Kepler, M. Dvorak, K. Schnake, C. Bellabarba, et al., AOSpine thoracolumbar spine injury classiﬁcation

system: fracture description, neurological status, and key modiﬁers, Spine (Phila Pa 1976) 38 (23) (2013 Nov 1) 2028–2037.

[3] E.E. Moore, T.H. Cogbill, M.A. Malangoni, G.J. Jurkovich, H.R. Champion, T.A. Gennarelli, et al., Organ injury scaling, II: pancreas,

duodenum, small bowel, colon, and rectum, J. Trauma 30 (11) (1990 Nov) 1427–1429.

[4] M. Beaunoyer, D. St-Vil, M. Lallier, H. Blanchard, Abdominal injuries associated with thoraco-lumbar fractures after motor vehicle

collision, J. Pediatr. Surg. 36 (5) (2001 May) 760–762.

[5] M. Fisher, K. Brasel, Evolving management of pancreatic injury, Curr. Opin. Crit. Care 17 (6) (2011 Dec) 613–617.

12

A.W. Tarabay et al. / Trauma Case Reports 5 (2016) 7–12

[6] B.C. Lin, R.J. Chen, J.F. Fang, Y.P. Hsu, Y.C. Kao, J.L. Kao, Management of blunt major pancreatic injury, J. Trauma 56 (4) (2004 Apr)

774–778.

[7] M.T. Tsai, J.T. Sun, K.C. Tsai, W.C. Lien, Isolated traumatic pancreatic rupture, Am. J. Emerg. Med. 28 (6) (2010 Jul) 745–749.
[8] B. Mitra, M. Fitzgerald, M. Raooﬁ, G.A. Tan, J.C. Spencer, C. Atkin, Serum lipase for assessment of pancreatic trauma, Eur. J. Trauma

Emerg. Surg. 40 (3) (2014 Jun) 309–313.

[9] E. Degiannis, M. Glapa, S.P. Loukogeorgakis, M.D. Smith, Management of pancreatic trauma, Injury 39 (1) (2008 Jan) 21–29.
[10] J. Gomez-Cerezo, A. Barbado Cano, I. Suarez, A. Soto, J.J. Rios, J.J. Vazquez, Pancreatic ascites: study of therapeutic options by analysis

of case reports and case series between the years 1975 and 2000, Am. J. Gastroenterol. 98 (3) (2003 Mar) 568–577.

[11] Y. Tajima, K. Fukuda, N. Tsuneoka, R. Tsutsumi, T. Kuroki, S. Onizuka, et al., Demonstration of a pancreaticopleural ﬁstula with

magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography, Am. J. Surg. 187 (6) (2004 Jun) 741–742.

[12] P. Balasubramanian, R. Jeyamani, S. Govil, A. Chacko, G. Kurian, H.S. Subhash, et al., Pancreatico-pericardial ﬁstula: a rare

complication of chronic pancreatitis, Indian J. Gastroenterol. 23 (1) (2004 Jan-Feb) 31–32.

[13] J.H. Wolf, G. Miller, R. Ashinoff, J. Dave, R.S. Leﬂeur, S.G. Frangos, et al., Pancreaticoureteral ﬁstula following penetrating abdominal

trauma, JOP 8 (5) (2007) 613–616.

[14] J.M. Chebli, P.D. Gaburri, A.F. de Souza, A.T. Ornellas, E.V. Martins Junior, L.A. Chebli, et al., Internal pancreatic ﬁstulas: proposal of a

management algorithm based on a case series analysis, J. Clin. Gastroenterol. 38 (9) (2004 Oct) 795–800.

[15] H.S. Kim, D.K. Lee, I.W. Kim, S.K. Baik, S.O. Kwon, J.W. Park, et al., The role of endoscopic retrograde pancreatography in the

treatment of traumatic pancreatic duct injury, Gastrointest. Endosc. 54 (1) (2001 Jul) 49–55.

[16] J. Halttunen, L. Weckman, E. Kemppainen, M.L. Kylanpaa, The endoscopic management of pancreatic ﬁstulas, Surg. Endosc. 19 (4)

(2005 Apr) 559–562.

[17] J.H. Patton Jr., S.P. Lyden, M.A. Croce, F.E. Pritchard, G. Minard, K.A. Kudsk, et al., Pancreatic trauma: a simpliﬁed management

guideline, J. Trauma 43 (2) (1997 Aug) 234–239 discussion 9-41.

[18] K. Melamud, C.A. LeBedis, J.A. Soto, Imaging of pancreatic and duodenal trauma, Radiol. Clin. N. Am. 53 (4) (2015 Jul) 757–771 viii.

