Case presentation

A 40-year-old female was referred to our center with the history of a roadside accident while she was travelling as a pillion rider
on a two-wheeler vehicle hit by a car from behind. The rider fell sideways and sustained clean cut wounds over the forearm and left
knee. The pillion rider was accelerated in the front and hit by the two-wheeler handle in the abdomen. She complained of right upper
abdominal pain and few minor abrasions over the right lower limb. There was no complaint of vomiting, seizures, back pain or
haematuria. Her past medical history was insigniﬁcant. On examination, patient was alert and conscious; vitals were stable, physical
and systemic examinations were normal. Routine work including hemogram, renal function test and serum electrolytes were normal.
Abdominal ultrasound showed mild free ﬂuid in pelvis. X ray chest and right lower limb were grossly normal. Contrast enhanced CT
(Computed tomography) abdomen revealed partial thrombus of left renal vein and infra hepatic inferior vena cava thrombus (Fig. 1).
There were no collateral vessels in the adjacent surrounding area suggesting it as an acute event. The renal artery was normal with no
evidence of renal parenchymal injury. Rest of the solid organs were grossly normal. In view of isolated venous involvement, the
conservative approach was trailed. Patient was advised strict bed rest and vitals were monitored at frequent intervals. Baseline
prothrombin time (PT) and international normalized ratio (INR) were done and the injection Enoxaparin 0.75 mg/kg twice a day
started after consultation with haematology expert. PT and INR were monitored daily and 2 mg warfarin tablet started on day 4,
overlapping with enoxaparin keeping therapeutic range of INR between 2 and 3. Patient was discharged on day 8 and advised to
follow up at regular intervals with INR. A repeat contrast CT after 3 months showed complete resolution of thrombus (Figs. 2, 3).
Haematology review was taken and anticoagulants were continued for another 3 months and tapered gradually. Currently, patient is
asymptomatic, 8 months follow up and planned for colour Doppler imaging of renal vessels.