Trauma Case Reports 1 (2015) 1–3

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Trauma Case Reports

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : h t t p : / / w w w . j o u r n a l s . e l s e vi e r . c o m /

t r a u m a - c a s e - r e p o r t s /

Case Report
Traumatic rupture of a solitary splenic hydatid cyst:
A case report☆
Moustafa Lakis a,c, Edith Hanna a, Michael G. Noujaim b, George Abi Saad a,c,⁎

a American University of Beirut Medical School, Beirut, Lebanon
b The University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA
c Division of General Surgery, American University of Beirut Medical Center, Beirut, Lebanon

a r t i c l e

i n f o

s u m m a r y

Article history:
Accepted 16 February 2015
Available online 23 April 2015

Keywords:
Echinococcus
Hydatid
Trauma
Splenectomy
Cysts
Surgery

The rupture of an Echinococcus granulosus hydatid cyst in the spleen
due to trauma is a rare event. In this case report we describe the case of a
39-year-old Lebanese male victim of a motor vehicle accident with a
ruptured solitary splenic hydatid cyst discovered by CT scan and excised
during exploratory laparotomy.
Echinococcosis or hydatid disease is a parasitic infestation by the Echino-
coccus genus of tapeworm. The eggs of E. granulosus, a species of Echino-
coccus, are fecal-orally transmitted to human hosts, most often from dog
feces, and manifest as cystic lesions termed hydatid. E. granulosus most
commonly affects the liver (75%), lungs (15%), and rarely the spleen
(2–5%) [1,2]. E. granulosus is particularly endemic to cattle rearing
areas of the Middle East. Infected patients most commonly present
with vague abdominal pain, as a result of mass effect or spontaneous
rupture of the cyst. Nevertheless, patient presentation may be due to
traumatic rupture of a hydatid cyst; however, this is very rare. Herein
we report a case of traumatic rupture of a solitary splenic hydatid cyst
in a 39-year-old male following a motor vehicle crash, managed follow-
ing the Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) protocol.

© 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier

. This is an open access
article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Ltd

☆ The authors of this case report have no conﬂicts of interest to disclose.
⁎ Corresponding author at: Abdel Aziz, Blue Bldg, 4th ﬂoor, American, University of Beirut Medical Center, Beirut, Lebanon. Tel.: +961

1350000x5680.

E-mail address: ga17@aub.edu.lb (G.A. Saad).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tcr.2015.02.001
2352-6440/© 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Ltd

. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license

2

Case report

M. Lakis et al. / Trauma Case Reports 1 (2015) 1–3

A previously healthy 39-year-old male presented to the emergency department 30 min after being in-
volved in a motor vehicle collision. The patient was well appearing, hemodynamically stable, and alert with
a Glasgow coma scale of 15. On physical examination, the patient's abdomen was distended with left upper
quadrant tenderness and bilateral ﬂank pain. There were no signs of rebound tenderness, peritoneal irritation
or left shoulder pain. An IV contrast enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis
revealed a 10.5 × 10 × 11 cm cystic lesion in the spleen with heterogeneously increased central intensity in-
dicative of active hemorrhage (Fig. 1). Additionally, a 7.5 cm laceration on the superior aspect of the spleen
was noted with a subcapsular splenic hematoma involving more than 50% of the splenic surface suggesting
a grade III splenic injury. CT scan also revealed hyperdense ﬂuid in the left paracolic gutter indicating an intra-
peritoneal bleed. Shortly after the completion of the CT scans, the patient became hypotensive and was
promptly treated with and responded to 2 L LR ﬂuid-challenge resuscitation. This was the only time that
the patient's condition became unstable. An exploratory laparotomy was performed 30 min after the time
of admission and revealed a large hemoperitoneum and a ruptured splenic cyst with a structure resembling
hydatid cystic membranes (Fig. 2). No other injuries were noted or sustained by the patient. A total splenec-
tomy was performed and the peritoneal cavity was irrigated with cetrimide for 10 min. Thorough exploration
of the abdomen revealed no other pathology. Post-operative pathological examination of the spleen con-
ﬁrmed the presence of a solitary cyst consistent with hydatid disease. Furthermore, scoleces of E. granulosus
were noted in the splenic parenchyma immediately adjacent to the cyst. An indirect hemagglutination test
for hydatid disease was negative (b1:32). As long-term management, the patient was started on Albendazole
400 mg twice daily and he was followed for a period of 6 months. The patient made a full recovery.

Discussion

Splenic hydatid cysts often present with non-speciﬁc symptoms such as dull abdominal pain, dyspepsia or
constipation. Alternatively, they may be asymptomatic in 30% of patients. Nonetheless, these cysts can have
serious complications, including ﬁstula of the colon or perforation into the diaphragm or bronchial tree
[3,4]. Most often, hydatid cysts rupture spontaneously. Rupture of a hydatid cyst secondary to trauma is
very rare, especially so in the spleen, which is the organ least affected in patients with E. granulosus infestation.

Fig. 1. Abdominopelvic computed tomography scan reveals a large cystic mass originating from the spleen. Increased central intensity is
noted that is indicative of active hemorrhage into a pre-existing splenic cyst or a large pseudoaneurysm.

M. Lakis et al. / Trauma Case Reports 1 (2015) 1–3

3

Fig. 2. Intra-operative image of the ruptured solitary splenic cyst.

CT scan is an important modality in the detection of hydatid cysts with 95% sensitivity [5]. CT ﬁndings nor-
mally include: calciﬁed cyst wall, daughter cysts, and membrane detachment [6,7]. Interestingly, none of
these ﬁndings were observed in our patient; thus, leading to a pre-operative differential diagnosis of simple
splenic cysts, pseudoaneurysm of the splenic artery, cystic hemangioma or lymphangioma. Post-operative
pathological examination of the excised spleen conﬁrmed the diagnosis of a solitary hydatid cyst due to a par-
asitic infection by E. granulosus, a tapeworm endemic to the region.

Total splenectomy is the primary modality for managing splenic hydatid cysts; nevertheless, partial sple-
nectomies may be considered as a treatment option that prevents post-splenectomy opportunistic infections
[8]. The non-operative treatment of blunt trauma to solid organs, namely the spleen and liver, is currently the
state-of-the-art modality of treatment in low-grade injuries and patients who are hemodynamically stable.
However, in similar injuries, special caution should be taken and patients should be explored to avoid the im-
mediate and long-term complications of ruptured hydatid cysts, such as anaphylactic shock and development
of abdominal hydatidosis. In our patient's case, hemorrhaging and hemodynamic instability as a result of the
ruptured cyst made a total splenectomy the more favorable treatment option. The patient was also empirically
treated with cetrimide to prevent hydatidosis.

In conclusion, we describe a rare case of traumatic rupture of a solitary splenic hydatid cyst at the
American University of Beirut Medical Center. Hydatid cysts due to echinococcosis must be considered in
the differential diagnosis of cystic lesions of the spleen in endemic areas. We consider these ﬁndings to be
key features for the diagnosis and treatment of ruptured splenic hydatid cysts.

References

[1] H. Singh, M.S. Arora, Primary hydatid cyst of the spleen, Med. J. Armed Force India 59 (2003) 169–170.
[2] A. Mazumdar, G. Singh, N.M. Gupta, Primary splenic hydatid in adults, Trop. Gastroenterol. 21 (2) (Apr-Jun 2000) 78–79.
[3] R.E. Ratych, Tumours, cysts and abscesses of spleen, in: J.L. Cameroon (Ed.), Current Surgical Therapy, 4th ed.Mosby, St Louis, 1992,

pp. 518–521.

[4] I. Alfageme, M. Martin, J. Hernandez, et al., Rupture of a long-standing splenic hydatid cyst into the bronchial tree, Clin. Infect. Dis. 19

[7] V. Durgun, S. Kapan, M. Kapan, et al., Primary splenic hydatidosis, Dig. Surg. 20 (1) (2003) 38–41.
[8] A.H. Bhandarwar, A.N. Katara, G.D. Bakhshi, et al., A review of literature — Splenic Hydatidosis, BHJ 44 (2008) 4.

[5] P. Polat, M. Kantarci, F. Alper, et al., Review hydatid disease from head to toe, Radiographics 23 (2) (Mar-Apr 2003) 475–494 (quiz 536-7).
[6] I. Pedrosa, A. Saíz, J. Arrazola, et al., Review hydatid disease: radiologic and pathologic features and complications, Radiographics 20

(5) (Nov 1994) 992–994.

(3) (May-Jun 2000) 795–817.

