Case report

A 6-year old male was admitted to our emergency department after a wooden stick penetrated his right eye and came out after
falling on the street. On admission, his general condition was well and Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) was 15. There was widespread
periorbital edema on his right eye. Pupils were isochoric, pupil reﬂexes globe movements were intact bilaterally. He showed no motor
or neurologic deﬁcits. On cranial computed tomography (CT) a displaced fracture on the right superior and posterior orbital wall and
right frontal subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) were observed. The optic nerve was intact (Fig. 1).
Ophthalmology was consulted and tetanus vaccine was administered. 2 h later the patient's condition worsened and control CT
showed cytotoxic edema on the right hemisphere. 4 h after admission the patient had 40 °C fever. Due to cytotoxic edema lumbar
puncture was not considered. A single dose of 1 mg/kg Mannitol was administered for the cerebral edema and empirical antibiotics in
form of Ceftriaxone-Vancomycin were given.
On the following day, 12 h after admission, a decrease in GCS was observed. Heavy eﬀusion with parenchymal character was
coming from his right eye (Fig. 2). Diﬀuse cerebral edema (Fig. 3a) with progression of the SAH were seen on CT (Fig. 3b) and the
patient underwent immediate surgery.
An external ventricular catheter (EVD) with an intracerebral pressure monitoring probe was placed. Beginning pressure was
measured as 32 mm Hg. After suﬃcient cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) drainage a wide 10 × 10 cm frontotemporal craniectomy was
performed. Brain parenchymal invasion in the right orbital canal was observed. The free bone fragments of the orbit were removed
and the dura was repaired using galeal graft and the orbital wall was reconstructed. Due to cerebral edema the bone ﬂap was not put
back and placed in the subcutaneous tissue under the intercostal space. Regression of the cerebral edema was observed in the post-
operative cranial CT (Fig. 4). ICP was measured as 6 mm Hg. The patient was extubated 6 days after surgery. He was cooperative for
simple verbal commands. No motor deﬁcit was observed and was released from hospital after 21 days without any motor or neu-
rologic deﬁcits. On his third month follow-up he did not show any complaints and underwent cranioplasty surgery from his own
autologous bone graft harvested from his subcutaneous tissue (Fig. 5).