Case report

The patient is a 32 year old female diagnosed with severe psycho-motoric retardation. She is a permanent resident of an in-
stitution for chronically debilitated children. She is heavily medicated with psychiatric drugs including carbamazepine, haloperi-
dol, promethazine and clonex due to endless restlessness and previous incidents of foreign body ingestions. Previous events
resulted in multiple endoscopic removals and one previous surgical procedure. The patient was admitted to another hospital
due to fever of unknown origin. On admission she was tachycardic, restless. Spiking fever up to 40 °C (104 F) was reported. Al-
though physical examination is unreliable due to her restlessness and cognitive impairment the abdomen was soft and non-
tender. Laboratory results were all within the normal limits.
Her work up included Chest x-ray that was normal and a computerized tomography (CT) scan of the chest and abdomen. The
CT scan identiﬁed several foreign bodies within the right colon (Fig. 1a), one of which was penetrating the colon at the hepatic
ﬂexure that was leaning upon the vena cava. The foreign body penetrated the vena cava resulting in intraluminal air (Fig. 1b). The
patient was transferred to our hospital for further treatment. On arrival the patient had spiking fever of 39.5 °C. She was hemo-
dynamically stable. The CT scan was reviewed and surgery was planned accordingly. The patient received ﬂuids and antibiotics,
Foley catheter and a nasogastric tube were inserted. During the operation a latero-medial mobilization of the right colon was per-
formed. The foreign body (7 cm wooden tree branch) that penetrated the colon and the inferior vena cave was identiﬁed.
The colon was carefully resected leaving the foreign body impaled in the vena cava for further control of the blood vessel be-
fore extracting it from the vein. Right hemicolectomy was performed. After removing the colon, the right lobe of the liver was
fully mobilized. Full exposure of the retro-hepatic vena cava enabled removal of the foreign bodies under proximal and distal con-
trol of the vena cava. The hole in the vena cava was debrided and repaired. Only then primary ileocolic anastomosis followed.
Operative course was uneventful. Post-operative course was complicated with recurrent high fevers, blood cultures revealed pen-
icillin resistant enterococcus, staph hemolyticus, Escherichia coli, and candida glabrata resistant to ﬂuconazole treated with
caspofungin. Due to the persistence of fevers a CT scan of the chest and abdomen was performed and a small collection of
ﬂuid in the retro-hepatic region was revealed and drained. Trans-esophageal echocardiography showed no evidence of endocar-
ditis. US Doppler of the vena cava revealed a 2.5 cm thrombus within the retro-hepatic vena cava. A positron emission tomogra-
phy (PET) CT ruled out infected thrombophlebitis of the vena cava. The patient recovered with IV antibiotics and the rest of her
hospitalization was uneventful. She was discharged for follow-up in the outpatient clinic.