Case presentation

A 66-year old osteoporotic woman presented to the emergency room with right sided hip pain following a mechanical fall. The
patient provided informed consent, which followed the McGill University Health Centre guidelines for experimental investigation.
The patient was exiting her car when she slipped on the ice and landed on her right side. 10 years prior to her presentation, she
sustained a right intertrochanteric femur fracture which was treated with a DHS. Since then, she has been on alendronate for her
osteoporosis. On examination, there was clear shortening and external rotation of the right leg, but she was neurovascularly intact.
She did not sustain any head trauma or loss of consciousness.
The patient's x-ray showed a subtrochanteric fracture distal to the DHS plate (Fig. 1). She was booked for removal of the DHS
followed by antegrade femoral nailing. During the operation, removal of the DHS failed with the usual technique as the side plate was
cold welded to the hip screw. We resorted to using a diamond burr to cut the top of the barrel on the DHS to assist with its removal.
This technique also failed and the final method attempted was helicoptering the plate out with the screw as a single unit in a counter-
clockwise direction. During that maneuver, we applied excessive torque and subsequently felt a sudden give. The possibility of a
fracture was confirmed by fluoroscopy and the x-ray showed an iatrogenic subcapital femoral neck fracture (Fig. 2A, B). Failure to
remove the hardware and the unexpected femoral neck fracture in conjunction with the unavailability of an arthroplasty surgeon, the
procedure was decided to be aborted as we were not prepared for a complex total hip arthroplasty. The incision was closed in layer
and skin traction was applied. The next day and after thorough planning, the DHS was removed using a standard posterior approach
with the morselization of the femoral head. The difficulty experienced with the removal of the DHS is evident by its aesthetics
following removal. Subsequently a total hip replacement was performed using a long fully porous coated stem prosthesis and
periprosthetic cerclage wires were added to bypass the fracture site, with good implant positioning on post op x-ray (Fig. 3).
Following definitive management of her hip fracture, Alendronic acid treatment was stopped. Instead, the patient was started on
vitamin D, calcium, denosumab and teriparatide as for patients who have failed typical osteoporosis therapy with a follow up in
3 months with the patient's family doctor and rheumatologist. The patient was followed up in arthroplasty clinic and was mobilizing
well with no difficulties or complications. Her 2-year follow-up x-ray is shown with satisfactory position of the hardware (Fig. 4).