Case Report

An otherwise healthy 13 year old female presented to the trauma bay after a bicycle accident. Primary survey was within nor-
mal limits with vital signs appropriate for age and Glasgow Coma Score of 15. Secondary survey was remarkable for a deep
3 centimeter (cm) laceration in the left lower quadrant. There was active bleeding from the wound, with bowel herniating
through a fascial defect. Given these ﬁndings the patient was brought to the operating room for exploration.
An exploratory laparotomy was performed via extension of the existing wound. The underlying fascial defect was found to be
approximately 5 cm. A serosal tear on the sigmoid colon was identiﬁed and over-sewn. Venous bleeding from the base of the sig-
moid mesentery was controlled with suture ligation. No further injuries were identiﬁed and no additional hemorrhage or ﬂuid
was noted. The complex abdominal wall injury was repaired primarily.
Routine admission urinalysis revealed microscopic hematuria, so computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis with
intravenous (IV) contrast was obtained post-operatively. No further traumatic injury was identiﬁed, however delayed images
were not obtained. A cystogram was obtained which did not demonstrate injury to the bladder. The patient's postoperative course
was notable for a doubling of the serum creatinine from 0.6 mg/dL (53.04 μmol/L) to 1.2 mg/dL (106.08 μmol/L). She also expe-
rienced ongoing abdominal pain, increasing distention and nausea. A retroperitoneal ultrasound was unremarkable except for
large volume ascites. A non-contrast repeat CT of the abdomen and pelvis on postoperative day ﬁve demonstrated a large amount
of ascites with a density of simple ﬂuid.
The patient underwent repeat laparotomy. Upon entry to the abdomen three liters of ﬂuid was drained, and intraoperative
analysis revealed a ﬂuid creatinine of 4.6 mg/dL (406.64 μmol/L). The left ureter was found to be transected near the middle
third with the two ends approximately 2.5 cm apart. Ureterogram was performed via the transected ends to conﬁrm anatomy
(Fig. 1). Primary repair over a double-J stent was performed with 5-0 Vicryl and a drain left in place in the retroperitoneum.
Post-operatively the patient recovered well and was discharged ﬁve days later after the operative drain was removed. The
double-J stent was removed at postoperative week six with concurrent cystoscopy and retrograde ureterogram demonstrating
a normal ureter with no evidence of stricture.