Trauma Case Reports 22 (2019) 100211

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Trauma Case Reports

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/tcr

Case Report
Acute splenic rupture following laparoscopic pneumoperitoneum:
A case report
Jean-Luc Delafontainea, Rebecca Morecib,⁎, Navdeep S. Samrac
a Department of Surgery, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center Shreveport, Shreveport, LA, USA
b Louisiana State University School of Medicine, Shreveport, LA, USA
c Department of Trauma, Acute Care Surgery, and Surgical Critical Care, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, LA, USA

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Laparoscopic
Trauma
Adhesions
Splenic
Rupture

Introduction

Introduction: Splenic rupture after laparoscopic surgery is a very rare complication. In this study,
we report a case of a splenic laceration that occurred during a laparoscopic gastrostomy tube
placement. The theorized mechanism in this case was acute disruption of a peri-splenic hema-
toma.
Case report: A 64-year-old African-American male presented after a motor vehicle accident with
multiple injuries and was admitted to a surgical intensive care unit, where he declined from ICU
days 6 through 11. The patient underwent tracheostomy and laparoscopic gastrostomy tube
placement given his significant neurologic deficits. Intraoperatively, the patient developed hy-
potension, leading to the discovery of hemoperitoneum and necessitating an emergent open
splenectomy.
Conclusion: Splenic rupture following laparoscopic procedures is a very rare phenomenon. In this
case, we believe the splenic rupture was secondary to an acute disruption of a previously he-
mostatic splenic hematoma involving the abdominal wall during creation of capnoperitoneum.

The first laparoscopic surgery in a human was performed in 1910 but it was not until the mid 1980s that laparoscopic surgery was
widely adopted and has since become the gold standard for many abdominal procedures [1]. Serious complications of laparoscopic
procedures are overall low, and approximately half of these complications result at the time of abdominal access [2,3]. The incidence
of abdominal organ injury due to abdominal access is 3–5 per 10,000 procedures. The most common organ injured is the small bowel
with a rate of 25.4%, followed by the iliac artery (18.5%) and colon (12.2%) [4]. However, splenic rupture following laparoscopic
surgery is rare with very few cases reported in the literature [5–14]. These cases hypothesize that the presence of adhesions between
the abdominal wall and the spleen is the cause of most ruptures.
Case report

A 64-year-old African American male with unknown past medical history arrived in the trauma bay following a motor vehicle
accident. On initial evaluation, the patient was alert but somewhat confused and had a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 13. Focused
Assessment with Sonography in Trauma (FAST) exam was performed immediately following the primary survey and found to be

⁎ Corresponding author at: LSU Health Shreveport, 1501 Kings Highway, Shreveport, LA 71103, USA.
E-mail address: Rbudis@lsuhsc.edu (R. Moreci).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcr.2019.100211
Accepted 16 June 2019
Available online 09 July 2019
2352-6440/ Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).

J.-L. Delafontaine, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 22 (2019) 100211

Fig. 1. Contrast-enhanced CT scans demonstrating peri-splenic hematoma (see arrows). Spleen unremarkable.

positive in the hepatorenal space. The patient was hemodynamically stable and was taken for further imaging including CTs of the
head, cervical spine, chest, abdomen and pelvis that revealed multiple injuries including subarachnoid hemorrhage, anterior left
3rd–8th rib fractures, right posterior 1st–3rd rib fractures, peri-hepatic and peri-splenic hematomas [Fig. 1], and a left lower
quadrant mesenteric hematoma with active extravasation. The patient was admitted to the ICU and underwent conservative man-
agement of mesenteric, peri-hepatic, and peri-splenic hematomas. On hospital day 6, the patient's mental status began to deteriorate,
prompting an immediate CT of his head and EEG, which were both negative. A repeat CT abdomen and pelvis study was not ordered
at this time. The patient was thought to be experiencing post-traumatic encephalopathy and eventually declined to GCS 3T. After
discussion with family, the decision was made to perform tracheostomy and laparoscopic gastrostomy tube placement. The patient
was prepped and draped in usual sterile fashion and the tracheostomy was performed first. We then turned our attention to the
patient's abdomen for laparoscopic gastrostomy tube placement. We began by gaining access to the abdomen with a Veress needle
through Palmer's point. The abdomen was insufflated to 15 mmHg. The patient then developed significant hypotension without a
decrease in end tidal carbon dioxide. We partially evacuated the capnoperitoneum with no improvement in hemodynamic status. At
this point, we rapidly inserted the laparoscope which showed widespread hemoperitoneum. We were unable to identify the source
laparoscopically and elected to convert to an open procedure. Upon opening the abdomen, we were easily able to identify an active
splenic hemorrhage; the splenic capsule was not specifically noted at this time. The spleen was rapidly medialized and the hilum was
controlled manually with an immediate improvement in blood pressure. The spleen was removed using a GIA stapler and the
remainder of the abdomen was inspected with no further injury noted. The patient was transfused two units of packed red blood cells
and taken to the surgical intensive care unit. The patient recovered and was ultimately discharged 16 days later. Pathology report of
the spleen described a “capsular laceration with focal parenchymal hemorrhage” — this is approximated as a grade 1 splenic injury
according to the AAST-OIS splenic injury scale.

Discussion

In this study, we reported a case of splenic rupture that occurred during laparoscopic gastrostomy tube placement. During this
procedure, there was no direct penetration of the spleen. However, abdominal inflation during the procedure is believed to have
resulted in sudden separation of the peri-splenic adhesions formed after initial trauma and bleeding.
On arrival to the ED, the patient had a CT abdomen and pelvis study which noted a peri-splenic hematoma and unremarkable
spleen. However, the patient spent 2 weeks in the ICU prior to laparoscopic surgery and we did not repeat the study during this time.
We cannot confirm or deny any evolving splenic injury or worsening peri-splenic hematoma which may have occurred between the
time of MVC and laparoscopic intervention. Therefore, we postulate an acute disruption of the splenic capsule occurred while
insufflating the abdomen. The disruption may have been initiated by the peri-splenic hematoma, adhesions, and/or a splenic injury.
Up to 40% of all splenectomies are the result of iatrogenic splenic injury [15]; the rate of splenectomy varies depending on the
procedure. A recent review conducted at the Mayo Clinic reported of 13,897 colectomies, 58 (0.4%) patients had a splenic injury, and
of those patients, 44 (76%) underwent splenectomy [16]. Other studies reported (1–8%) risk of splenic injury during left hemi-
colectomy and the rate of splenectomy can increase up to 21–60% in surgeries involving the proximal abdominal aorta and its
branches [15]. A review by the Mayo Clinic reported a 0.8% incidence of splenectomies during left sided nephrectomies [17], while
others reported a higher incidence of 2.6%–13.2% [18].
We were only able to identify 10 prior cases of splenic injury following laparoscopic procedures in the literature (Table 1). Four of
these cases [5,6,11,12] occurred within 36 h of laparoscopy, two cases [7,8] occurred on the fifth postoperative day, and one case
occurred the third postoperative week [9]. All except two cases were treated with midline laparotomy and splenectomy. The other
two cases were treated with fibrin glue and splenorraphy respectively [11,14]. Splenic rupture is postulated to be due to sudden
separation of adhesions between the parietal peritoneum and splenic capsule resulting in subcapsular hematoma rupture after ab-
dominal wall stretching during creation of capnoperitoneum.

2

