Trauma Case Reports 26 (2020) 100295

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Trauma Case Reports

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/tcr

Case Report
Acute subdural hematoma in an elite-level rugby union player☆
Taylor J. Batesa,⁎, Paul Leeb, Tayt M. Ellisona, Jason S. Ahueroc, Matthew R. Schmitza

a San Antonio Military Medical Center, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Fort Sam Houston, TX, United States of America
b University of New England College of Osteopathic Medicine, Biddeford, ME, United States of America
c Houston Methodist Orthopaedics and Sports Medicine, Houston, TX, United States of America

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Acute subdural hematoma
Head trauma
Rugby
Athletes

Introduction

Acute subdural hematoma is a rare but potentially fatal medical condition in athletes. This
condition has been reported in both contact and non-contact sports. Patients who survive an
acute subdural hematoma typically have lifelong deﬁcits and require extensive rehabilitation.
Prompt recognition of this condition and access to a hospital with an available neurosurgeon is
critical. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst report of a subdural hematoma in an elite-level rugby
player.

Intracranial hemorrhage is a rare but potentially devastating condition aﬀecting athletes. Although injuries to the upper and
lower extremities are most common in sports, head injuries can have devastating neurological consequences and are potentially fatal.
Subdural hematomas develop over hours and days following impact and are a leading cause of death and morbidity in athletes [1].
Mortality rates have been reported as high as 90% when not recognized and treated promptly [2].

We present a rare case of subdural hematoma in a 27 year-old elite-level rugby union player who underwent emergent neuro-
surgical intervention, ultimately leading to full recovery. Prompt recognition of head injuries is vital to prevent devastating out-
comes. Orthopaedic surgeons are often the senior medical provider during athletic events and should be aware of the signs of
subdural hematoma to ensure prompt recognition and transport in the event of head trauma.

Case report

A 27-year-old elite-level rugby union player was participating in an international test match and sustained a blow to his head from
another player's knee. There was no loss of consciousness or memory loss, although immediately after impact the patient reported
feeling confused, which resolved over several seconds. He continued playing for an additional 15 min before alerting the head team
physician (MRS) and match day doctor (JSA) about vision changes in his right eye and stating his left leg was “not responding
properly”. Upon sideline evaluation, his neurologic exam was normal despite the patient's subjective complaints. However, his
complaint of neurological deﬁcits prompted immediate application of a cervical collar and transport to the nearest Level 1 trauma
center for further evaluation. The decision for transport was based on his subjective neurological symptoms after a direct blow to the
head, despite a normal examination.

☆ No funding was obtained for this project.
⁎ Corresponding author at: San Antonio Military Medical Center, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, 3551 Roger Brooke Drive, JBSA-Fort Sam

Houston, TX 78219, United States of America.

E-mail address: taylor.j.bates5.mil@mail.mil (T.J. Bates).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcr.2020.100295
Accepted 19 February 2020
Available online 05 March 2020
2352-6440/ Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).

T.J. Bates, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 26 (2020) 100295

Figs. 1 & 2. Pre-operative imaging of our patient upon presentation showing a crescent-shaped extra-axial ﬂuid collection. There is approximately
10 mm of midline shift, cerebral swelling, and eﬀacement of the lateral ventricles.

Upon arrival to the emergency department the player was hemodynamically stable with a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 15. No
other injuries were identiﬁed. His medical history included three documented head concussions that all responded to conservative
measures with no prolonged symptoms, he had no other known head trauma. Additional history was relevant for minor muscu-
loskeletal trauma, including an acromioclavicular separation, but no other medical conditions or co-morbidities. On exam, the player
could accurately recall the event. The neurological motor exam was unremarkable in all four extremities, including his left lower
extremity. He had intact sensation to light touch in his upper and lower extremities. Pupils were equal, round, and reactive to light.
Extraocular movements and cranial nerves II-XII were intact.

Emergent CT scan without contrast identiﬁed a crescent shaped extra-axial ﬂuid collection consistent with a subdural hematoma
and 10 mm midline shift (Figs. 1 & 2). The posterior and temporal horn of the right ventricle were nearly completely eﬀaced. The
posterior aspect of the hematoma was hyperdense, consistent with an acute bleed, while the anterior half appeared isodense with the
cerebral cortex. The heterogeneous density likely represents unclotted blood anteriorly, but could also reﬂect acute on chronic
bleeding or cerebrospinal ﬂuid extravasation into the subarachnoid space due to an arachnoid laceration. There were no additional
lesions noted. The hospital's neurosurgeon was immediately contacted and the player underwent an emergent right frontoparietal
craniotomy and hematoma evacuation. The patient's rehabilitation course included inpatient and outpatient physical therapy, ulti-
mately making a full recovery without any neurological or cognitive deﬁcits. He subsequently retired from competitive rugby and has
become a coach for a professional rugby club.

Discussion

Rugby is one of the most popular sports globally and is gaining popularity in the United States. ASDH are rare in athletics,
however they can lead to long term disability or death if not promptly recognized and treated. Subdural hematomas are the most
common intracranial hemorrhage in American football, while epidural hematomas are reportedly more frequent in un-helmeted
sports [3]. Signiﬁcant disability can result despite early recognition and expedited evacuation. In a review of brain injury-related
fatalities in American football from 1945 to 1990, ASDH was associated with 429 of 497 (86%) of deaths [1]. In addition to American
football, ASDH has been identiﬁed as a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in other sports prone to head injury such as judo,
boxing, and snowboarding [4].

Cantu [5] reviewed four types of intracranial hemorrhage that should be considered when evaluating an athlete after head
trauma. The four types are epidural, subdural, intracerebral, and intracranial. All may be fatal and should prompt a thorough
assessment and follow-up. Patient's with an epidural hematoma may experience a lucid interval prior to progressive deterioration due
to the rapidly expanding hematoma after injury to the middle meningeal artery. Intracerebral hematomas usually arise from a torn
artery and are typically not associated with a lucid interval. Death from intracerebral bleeding may occur before the athlete arrives at
the hospital. Intracranial hemorrhaging is subarachnoid and is the result of injury to vessels on the brain surface. This type of
hemorrhage can typically be treated conservatively without surgery unless a vascular anomaly is present.

Studies of injury patterns in rugby union players have demonstrated that head and neck injuries represent 12% to 33% of all
injuries, second to lower limb injuries which account for 41 to 55% of injuries followed by injuries of the upper limb (15–24%) [6–8].
Despite the high incidence of injuries aﬀecting the head, actual intracranial injuries such as concussion and intracranial bleeding has
been reported as being much lower. In a study encompassing 91 matches, Bathgate et al. [8] reported the head as the most commonly
injured region, accounting for 25% (36 of 143) of injuries. Brooks et al. [7] recorded only 3 concussions out of 145 total injuries over
63 weeks in a prospective study of the 2003 England Rugby World Cup squad. These studies reﬂect the relatively low incidence of
intracranial injuries. Therefore, training coaches, staﬀ, and athletes to recognize concerning signs and symptoms should remain a
priority for any athletic program with a goal to achieve the best possible recovery from these potentially devastating injuries.

Symptoms that should raise concern for acute subdural hematoma include loss of consciousness, headache, confusion, vomiting,

2

T.J. Bates, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 26 (2020) 100295

dizziness, and convulsive seizures [4,9]. Focal signs may occur, but clinical manifestations are most often nonlocalizing and present
as slowly progressive neurologic deterioration, typically beginning within 48 h of injury [10]. These neurological signs result from
pressure exerted on the brain. In the absence of signiﬁcant brain injury, symptoms may develop over days or weeks due to a slowly
enlarging hematoma [5]. CT scan should be obtained if a headache persists after head trauma [4]. Due to the often non-focal exam
ﬁndings early in the course of ASDH, it is paramount to listen to the athlete's symptomatology and consider advanced imaging if
worrisome signs are exhibited.

Conclusion

We present a rare case of subdural hematoma in a 27 year-old elite-level rugby union player who underwent emergent neuro-
surgical intervention followed by a full recovery. Prompt recognition of head injuries is vital to prevent devastating outcomes. We
recommend team medical staﬀ remain vigilant for signs and symptoms and develop a plan that includes expedient transport to a
medical facility with neurosurgical support, regardless of the level of competition. History and subjective symptoms should be
carefully assessed and transport should be considered even in the absence of concerning physical exam ﬁndings.

Disclosure

The views expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the oﬃcial policy or position of the

Department of Defense or the US Government.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Taylor J. Bates:Writing - original draft, Conceptualization,

Investigation.Paul Lee:Writing - original draft,
Investigation.Tayt M. Ellison:Writing - review & editing.Jason S. Ahuero:Writing - review & editing.Matthew R.
Schmitz:Conceptualization, Investigation, Writing - review & editing, Supervision.

References

[1] R.C. Cantu, F.O. Mueller, Brain injury-related fatalities in American football, 1945–1999, Neurosurgery 52 (4) (2003) 846–852 (discussion 852-843).
[2] J.M. Seelig, D.P. Becker, J.D. Miller, R.P. Greenberg, J.D. Ward, S.C. Choi, Traumatic acute subdural hematoma: major mortality reduction in comatose patients

treated within four hours, N. Engl. J. Med. 304 (25) (1981) 1511–1518.

[3] S.A. Morris, W.H. Jones, M.R. Proctor, A.L. Day, Emergent treatment of athletes with brain injury, Neurosurgery 75 (Suppl. 4) (2014) S96–s105.
[4] S. Nagahiro, Y. Mizobuchi, Current topics in sports-related head injuries: a review, Neurol. Med. Chir. 54 (11) (2014) 878–886.
[5] R.C. Cantu, Head injuries in sport, Br. J. Sports Med. 30 (4) (1996) 289–296.
[6] J.H. Brooks, S.P. Kemp, Recent trends in rugby union injuries, Clin. Sports Med. 27 (1) (2008) 51–73 (vii-viii).
[7] J.H. Brooks, C.W. Fuller, S.P. Kemp, D.B. Reddin, A prospective study of injuries and training amongst the England 2003 Rugby World Cup squad, Br. J. Sports

Med. 39 (5) (2005) 288–293.

[8] A. Bathgate, J.P. Best, G. Craig, M. Jamieson, A prospective study of injuries to elite Australian rugby union players, Br. J. Sports Med. 36 (4) (2002) 265–269

(discussion 269).

[9] B.P. Boden, R.L. Tacchetti, R.C. Cantu, S.B. Knowles, F.O. Mueller, Catastrophic head injuries in high school and college football players, Am. J. Sports Med. 35

(7) (2007) 1075–1081.

[10] M.P. Frosch, D.C. Anthony, U.D. Girolami, The central nervous system, Robbins and Cotran Pathologic Basis of Disease, 9th ed., Saunders/Elsevier, Philadelphia,

PA, 2015, pp. 1251–1318.

3

