Trauma Case Reports 25 (2020) 100265

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Trauma Case Reports

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/tcr

Case Report
Bilateral fractures of acetabulum in a young girl with osteogenesis
imperfecta and epilepsy
Antonio Medicia, Mariano Giuseppe Di Salvatorea, Raﬀaele Pezzellab,
Andrea Fidanzab,⁎, Alfonso Maria De Simonea, Vittorio Calvisib

a AORN S. Giuseppe Moscati, UOC Ortopedia e Traumatologia, Avellino, Italy
b Department of Life Health & Environmental Sciences, University of L'Aquila, Unit of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, L'Aquila, Italy

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Osteogenesis imperfecta
Protrusio acetabuli
Column fracture
Blue sclera
Epilepsy
Ipoacusia

Introduction

We report a case of bilateral displaced acetabular fractures including both columns fractures with
protrusio acetabuli in a female patient, aged 15 years, with osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) (Sillence
Type I), epilepsy, blue sclera and bilateral ipoacusia. Since OI is a rare genetic disorder char-
acterized by an increased propensity to osteopenia, intraoperative fracture risks and hemorrhagic
diathesis, we opted for the open reduction and internal ﬁxation of the acetabula in two surgical
steps and using two diﬀerent approaches. Although the clinical outcomes are not excellent in this
report (HHS 45/100), the authors suggest that chances of a good outcome with reconstruction of
the acetabulum must be balanced against the beneﬁts of early or late total hip arthroplasty. The
goal was to delay a joint replacement as long as possible due to the patient's young age.

Level of evidence: V, case report.

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a rare genetic disorder characterized by abnormal collagen formation associated with increased
bone fragility and recurrent fractures throughout life [1]; moreover, patients with OI often have an inherent coagulation defect due to
abnormal collagen within endothelial capillaries [2,3].

In a healthy adolescent or adult, a displaced fracture of the acetabulum is usually treated by open reduction and ﬁxation. In OI
patients this management may be diﬃcult: in fact, bleeding diathesis and friable tissues should be considered, as well as possible
deformities, such as protrusio acetabuli and osteopenia, which reduce the bone stock and increase the risk of intraoperative fracture.
Postoperatively, hypertrophic callus or heterotopic ossiﬁcation (HO) can also be expected in OI patients, which can be used to
provide additional stability and a suitable bone stock for future ﬁxation in the event of a new fracture [2].

We have surgically treated bilateral displaced acetabulum fractures in a patient with osteogenesis imperfecta and epilepsy. To our

knowledge, it is the ﬁrst case of a patient with this rare disorder to be described in the literature.

Case report

A 15-year-old woman was diagnosed with osteogenesis imperfecta (Sillence Type I) at a regional reference pediatric hospital.
Although a genetic characterization of the disease is currently underway and the patient never underwent a bone density test, she

⁎ Corresponding author at: Piazzale S. Tommasi, 1, 67100 L'Aquila, Italy.
E-mail address: andrea.ﬁdanza@graduate.univaq.it (A. Fidanza).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcr.2019.100265
Accepted 6 November 2019
Available online 27 November 2019
2352-6440/ © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).

A. Medici, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 25 (2020) 100265

Fig. 1. The ﬁrst X-ray show bilateral multifragmentary fracture of the acetabulum and protrusion of the femoral heads in the pelvis.

expresses the same phenotypic traits as her mother, who suﬀers from autosomal dominant OI. Following a fall from a chair during an
epileptic seizure, the young patient came to our observation. Medical history did not predict any other fractures. She was not taking
bisphosphonates before the injury but she was taking valproic acid for epilepsy.

On physical examination the patient had blue sclera, bilateral ipoacusia, inability to ambulate, and absolute impossibility to

active and passive motion of both hips due to pain.

The imaging showed acetabular fractures, which were classiﬁed as associated both-column fractures with protrusio acetabuli4
(Fig. 1). Three dimensional reconstructed computed tomography (CT) examination revealed a greater degree of comminution and
displacement than could be appreciated on the plain radiographs (Fig. 2).

Once informed consent was obtained from the patient and her parents, the preoperative preparation by the orthopaedic and
anaesthesia team consisted in typing and cross matching eight units of packed red blood cells, fresh frozen plasma, cryoprecipitate,
desmopressin, and interoperative cell salvage capability available for the operation.

On the ﬁfth post-trauma day, considering the young age of the patient, the comorbidities and the operative duration, we opted for

the ﬁxation of the acetabula in two surgical steps.

At ﬁrst, we performed ORIF of bilateral posterior columns via Iselin approach. A pelvic reconstruction plate was shaped and
positioned along the perimeter of the pelvis until its ﬁxation (Fig. 3). The patient was extremely osteopenic, bones were very fragile,
and the reduction obtained from the fracture was the best possible given the starting conditions. Since on the right side the posterior
synthesis alone appeared insuﬃcient to guarantee a lasting reduction of the femoral head in the acetabulum, we drilled a Kirschner
wire to provide stable ﬁxation and to avoid possible future dislocations.

The second surgical step was performed on post-injury day ten via a bilateral modiﬁed Stoppa approach and augmented by
creating the lateral window of the ilioinguinal approach [5]. Bilaterally, there were multiple devitalised, free-ﬂoating, articular
fragments medial to the quadrilateral surface that were deemed no-reconstructible. Two dedicated suprapectineal plate® (Stryker
corporate, Selzach, Switzerland) were applied to reconstruct anterior column and quadrilateral lamina of both hips.

The post-operative period was uneventful, hemoglobin never fell below 10 mg/dl and intraoperatively the blood loss was less than
400 cl and no blood transfusion was necessary. She was mobilized on crutches with touch weight-bearing for six weeks and partial
weight-bearing for another six weeks.

After three weeks, the patient was discharged to home therapy with bisphosphonates and referred to a specialist center for OI
disease. We followed the patient weekly for one month, then monthly until the sixth month, with radiographic control at 30, 60 and
120 days (Fig. 4). The hips function was evaluated with Harris Hip Score (HHS) with result of 45/100 at the ﬁnal follow-up. The

2

A. Medici, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 25 (2020) 100265

Fig. 2. The three dimensional reconstructed computed tomography gave us further details for planning the operation through intrapelvic and
exopelvic vision.

Numeric Pain Rating Scale (NPRS), a segmented numeric version of the visual analog scale (VAS), used to assess pain intensity,
reported a score of 5/10 (moderate pain) at the ﬁnal follow-up. The last radiographic examination showed an adequate reduction of
the fracture and a satisfactory wall and bone stock for a subsequent prosthesis: the patient developed a bilateral post-traumatic
arthrosis with heterotopic calciﬁcations typical of the underlying disease.

Discussion

Despite the less ominous Type I form of OI, our patient's blue sclera and bilateral hearing aids were a harbinger of the poor bone
quality and of increased risk of hemorrhagic blood loss [6,7]. Whilst post-operative HO or hypertrophic callus formation was also
anticipated, the primary goal was to achieve a stable reconstruction with minimisation of perioperative blood loss, empirically
predictable [1,6].

The mechanism of the injury alone suggested the poor quality of bone stock as our patient suﬀered an extremely comminuted
fracture as a result of low energy kinematics. Low energy acetabular fractures in OI patients have been described in other case
reports, but they have not reported the involvement of both columns and both acetabula [8,9].

Darmanis and Bircher described 2 patients with OI each sustaining T-type acetabular fractures, without signiﬁcant comminution,
according to the Judet–Letournel classiﬁcation system [4,8]. Each fracture had occurred in relatively low energy environments: the
two cases involved a 16-year-old man whilst playing football who also sustained a concomitant posterior hip dislocation, and the
other a 25-year-old woman who slipped whilst walking [8]. Ziran et al. described a 25-year-old woman with OI who suﬀered a T-type
fracture during a bed-to-chair transfer at home [9]. Liporace and Yoon [10] reported single-stage total hip arthroplasty and fracture
ﬁxation on an adult patient with a both column fracture.

In patients with OI, there is a 10%–30% incidence of bleeding diathesis [6]. This coagulation defect is related to decreased
capillary strength, as well as to the eﬀect of abnormal collagen on platelet-endothelial cell interactions. In this report, the fracture
involved both columns, in accordance with the Judet-Letournel classiﬁcation [4]. This demanding pattern often requires two surgical
approaches, or at the least, the passage of screws through the quadrilateral lamina from one column to the other [8,11]. The surgical
technique must be gentle because bony fragments can easily become comminuted. We encountered a protrusio acetabuli and a very
thin quadrilateral lamina, and neither the right- nor left-side fractures pattern allowed a screw ﬁxation without penetrating the joint,
for this reason we opted for a dedicated plate on the quadrilateral lamina. The main aim of the intervention was to reduce the femoral

3

A. Medici, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 25 (2020) 100265

Fig. 3. X-ray control after the ﬁrst surgical time that consisting in the implant of a posterior pelvic plate and a Kirschner wire in order to maintain
the femoral head relocation.

heads inside the acetabulum and stabilize them in order to allow the basic movements for the patient and to restore suﬃcient a
satisfactory medial bone stock to support a hip prosthesis implant in the future. The chances of a good outcome with reconstruction of
the acetabulum must be balanced against the beneﬁts of early or late arthroplasty. Although the intraoperative analysis of the
acetabular reconstruction yielded a stable construct, and the patient is now autonomous in carrying out normal daily activities,
functional result was not very satisfactory and x-rays show an advanced osteoarthritis of both hips.

Despite the high risk of bleeding, poor bone quality, friable tissue, the complexity of these fractures in our opinion exclude the
possibility of nonoperative treatment. We do know that an acute total hip arthroplasty yields superior outcomes only if there is a
simultaneous synthesis of the fracture [11], however the extremely long surgical times to obtain reduction, synthesis and hip joint
replacement in a single step - which in the case described would have been bilateral - would have further exposed the patient to a
higher risk of infection, bleeding and a greater rate of cup mobilization [12].

For this reason, we have tried to preserve the native articulation due to the young age of the patient, postponing the joint
resurfacing in a moment of clinical stability and therefore as an intervention in election and not in urgency, also applying a correct
prophylaxis for heterotopic calciﬁcations.

Conclusion

In summary, acetabular fractures in patients with osteogenesis imperfecta can pose an extremely daunting treatment scenario.
The authors suggest that, when choosing treatment options, it is primarily mandatory to try to safeguard the original joint in order to
postpone as long as possible a prosthetic replacement, especially in very young patients.

Declaration of competing interest

We declare that authors of this study do not have any ﬁnancial disclosure and have not received any form of grant for this study.

4

A. Medici, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 25 (2020) 100265

Fig. 4. X-ray control at last follow-up as result of reconstruction of anterior column and quadrilateral lamina that show, despite bone fragility, a
good ﬁxation and a satisfactory bone stock to plan a future hip arthroplasty.

References

[1] D. Basel, R.D. Steiner, Osteogenesis imperfecta: recent ﬁndings shed new light on this once well-understood condition, Genet Med 11 (2009) 375–385.
[2] R. Ramaswamy, Y. Kosashvili, H. Cameron, Bilateral total hip replacement in osteogenesis imperfecta with hyperplastic callus, J Bone Joint Surg Br 91 (2009)

[3] G.A. Stynowick, J.D. Tobias, Perioperative care of the patient with osteogenesis imperfecta, Orthopedics 30 (2007) 1043–1049.
[4] R. Judet, J. Judet, E. Letournel, Fractures of the acetabulum: classiﬁcation and surgical approaches for open reduction preliminary report, J. Bone Joint Surg.

812–814.

Am. 46 (1964) 1615–1646.

[5] J.D. Cole, B.R. Bolhofner, Acetabular fracture ﬁxation via a modiﬁed Stoppa limited intrapelvic approach description of operative technique and preliminary

treatment results, Clin. Orthop. Relat. Res. 305 (1994) 112–123.

[6] M.T. Keegan, B.D. Whatcott, B.A. Harrison, Osteogenesis imperfecta, perioperative bleeding, and desmopressin, Anesthesiology 97 (2002) 1011–1013.
[7] S. Das, K. Bhatnagar, Blue sclera and osteogenesis imperfecta - a rare association, Kerala J Ophthalmol 29 (2017) 240–243.
[8] S. Darmanis, M. Bircher, Fractures of the acetabulum in osteogenesis imperfecta, J Bone Joint Surg Br 88 (2006) 670–672.
[9] N.M. Ziran, J.L. Johnson, S.J. Morgan, W.R. Smith, Femoral artery thrombosis after internal ﬁxation of a transverse acetabular fracture in a patient with

osteogenesis imperfecta type I, Patient Saf Surg 2 (1) (2008).

[10] F.A. Liporace, R.S. Yoon, M.A. Frank, J.P. Maurer, R.J. Gaines, Single-stage total hip arthroplasty and fracture ﬁxation for a both column acetabular fracture in

type I osteogenesis imperfecta, Injury 42 (2011) 1184–1187.

[11] M. Hanschen, S. Pesch, S. Huber-Wagner, P. Biberthaler, Management of acetabular fractures in the geriatric patient, SICOT J 3 (2017) 37.
[12] P.E. Beaulé, D.B. Griﬃn, J.M. Matta, The Levine anterior approach for total hip replacement as the treatment for an acute acetabular fracture, J. Orthop. Trauma

18 (2004) 623–629.

5

