Trauma Case Reports 26 (2020) 100289

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Trauma Case Reports

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/tcr

Case Report
Complications of interosseous infusion resulting in a diagnostic
dilemma
Mohammad Noah Hasan Khana, Abdul Basit Jamalb,⁎, Syed Neshat Anjuma

a Southampton general hospital, Southampton, United Kingdom
b Ittefaq hospital, Lahore, Pakistan

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Resuscitation
CPR
Intraosseous line
Septic arthritis
Humeral osteomyelitis
Septic shock
Documentation error

Introduction

Successful revival of a patient with cardiac arrest need vigilant eﬀort on behalf of whole team but
sometimes missing a small thing can create disaster. Here we present a case of 58 years old obese
lady who was revived from a cardiac arrest secondary to septic shock. Obstruction due to
proximal ureteric stone was relieved with JJ stent insertion. She required renal replacement
therapy and invasive ventilation. Fever and inﬂammatory blood markers improved and she woke
up after 6 days in intensive care unit (ICU). She developed another episode of sepsis but this time
it was her shoulder that was hurting. Initially it was thought to be an iatrogenic skeletal injury
during aggressive cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) but radiographs came out to be normal.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) created more confusion by showing septic arthritis with
proximal humeral osteomyelitis and gas formation. MRI suggested that it might be the sequelae
of an intraosseous line insertion. All documented records were silent regarding the intraosseous
line insertion. Resuscitation team was contacted and inquired. They conﬁrmed the insertion of
intraosseous line insertion during initial resuscitation which was removed after securing per-
ipheral vascular access and before transferring the patient to ICU but they forgot to document.
Her shoulder joint was washed out and debrided arthroscopically. She made a safe recovery
without any other problem.

Intraosseous access is used to deliver ﬂuids and drugs directly to vascular system through bone marrow. Proximal and distal tibia,
proximal humerus and sternum are the preferred sites. It takes less than 01 min to insert an intraosseous line and ﬂow rates of up to
125 ml/min can be achieved. These lines are removed once a stable vascular access has been secured [1]. There are various com-
mercially available devices for each site of insertion. They have their own advantages and disadvantages [2]. Leidel BA et al. de-
scribed the intraosseous route as fast and eﬃcacious compared to central venous catheterization in adult patients under resuscitation
in the emergency department [3].

Intraosseous route has its complications, like osteomyelitis, compartment syndrome, local infection, fat embolism and growth
plate damage in skeletally immature patients [4]. We describe our case to present another very rare complication, the septic arthritis
of shoulder joint after intraosseous line insertion for resuscitation of a patient with cardiac arrest.

⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: noah_khan@hotmail.com (M.N.H. Khan), dr.basit@live.com (A.B. Jamal).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcr.2020.100289
Accepted 17 February 2020
Available online 13 March 2020
2352-6440/ Crown Copyright © 2020 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).

M.N.H. Khan, et al.

Case report

Trauma Case Reports 26 (2020) 100289

58 years old obese lady was brought in emergency department by rescue team. She was accompanied by her son. She presented in
critical condition, was confused, tachypneic and tachycardiac. According to attendant, she was complaining for last 2–3 days of
abdominal pain, fever, decreased oral intake and decreased urination. Presently she was taking her antihypertensive medication. Few
minutes after arrival to emergency department she collapsed and was coded. She was pulseless with electrical cardiac activity (PEA).
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) was initiated according to Adult Cardiac Life Support (ACLS) protocol. Peripheral vascular
access was diﬃcult with several failed attempts. Patient was revived after 5 min of chest compression, endotracheal tube ventilation
and single shot of adrenaline. Initial investigations revealed raised WCC, CRP and very high blood glucose levels. She was previously
non-diabetic. Working diagnosis of septic shock was made. She was put on broad spectrum antibiotics which were changed according
to sensitivity report of blood and urine cultures. Femoral arterial line was used for monitoring, ﬂuid and drug administration. She was
sedated and put on invasive ventilation. She was shifted to intensive care unit for monitoring and management. She remained oliguric
despite ﬂuid replacement. Computed tomography (CT) abdomen was performed which revealed impacted proximal right ureteric
stone with dilatation of pelvicaleceal system and bi-basal lung consolidation. She was reviewed by urology team for urosepsis and JJ
stent was place to relieve the obstruction. Frack pus and old blood was drained which conﬁrmed the reason of shock to be the
urosepsis. Urine output improved but she still needed renal replacement therapy. Fever improved but it didn't touch the baseline.
Similarly WCC and CRP were showing a decreasing trend. On 6th post admission day patient regained consciousness, urine output
improved and invasive ventilatory support was withdrawn. She was transferred out of intensive care unit. She again developed high
grade fever, WCC and CRP was persistently raised. Now that patient was conscious and oriented, she started complaining of left
shoulder joint pain associated with weakness of left upper limb. Orthopedics team was asked to review the patient. On initial
examination, mild joint eﬀusion was suspected and turbid blood stained ﬂuid was aspirated. Iatrogenic skeletal injury during CPR
was suspected and radiograph was obtained which was unremarkable other than degenerative changes. Magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) scan was advised to rule out soft tissue pathology. MRI showed large eﬀusion with surrounding tissue edema, bone marrow
edema with gas formation in proximal humerus. Based on these ﬁndings MRI suggested the diﬀerential diagnoses of septic arthritis
with proximal humerus osteomyelitis, gas gangrene and sequelae of proximal humeral intraosseous line. This was something new for
the whole team. All notes were reviewed again but there was no mention of intraosseous line insertion. Resuscitation team was
contacted and inquired about the intraosseous line and they conﬁrm that intraosseous line was inserted for initial resuscitation and it
was removed when femoral arterial line was secured, but they forgot to mention it in their notes. Mystery was solved. Shoulder joint
was decompressed and washed arthroscopically. She was also diagnosed to have type II diabetes mellitus by endocrinology team and
was managed accordingly. Rest of her recovery was uneventful. She was booked by urologist for removal of stone at a later stage.

Discussion

It was 1922 when Drinker et al. ﬁrst documented the use of intraosseous route for delivery of drugs and ﬂuid [5]. Since then this
route has been used in pediatric and adult population for ﬂuid resuscitation and drug delivery when peripheral vascular access is not
obtainable. Complications, although not very common, do occur and include local infection, air or fat embolism, local tissue ex-
travasation, dislodgment, osteomyelitis, compartment syndrome and growth plate injury etc. [2].

A multi-center study looking into the complications of intraosseous line in pediatric population noted that no complications

occurred when this line was used in 239 patients in emergency department and 52 inpatients [6].

Chalopin T et al. described a case of extensive tibial osteomyelitis in adult male 3 months after this site was used for intraosseous
delivery of drugs and ﬂuids [7]. A 2.5 month old infant lost a limb to ischemia and compartment syndrome due to intraosseous line
insertion [4]. 67 years old lady received ﬂuid and medications through humeral intraosseous route because below knee amputation
on one side and foot amputation on contralateral side. Intraosseous line was removed after 24 h but she developed deltoid com-
partment syndrome 2 weeks after arrival to hospital. Fasciotomy and debridement was done to relieve the severe pain [8].

Well maintained record are very important communication tool, especially in the current climate of multiprofessional working
[9]. ‘If it's not written down; it didn't happen.’ is self-explanatory. Amanda Andrews and Bernie St Aubyn quote “a patient claimed
that one district nurse did not wash her hands when she visited his house to dress his wound. Although the nurse stated that she
always washed her hands with alcohol rub following local policy, there was no recorded evidence of this” [10].

Our case is unique in two ways. Firstly it is a very rare complication of a time tested lifesaving procedure, secondly the patient was
put in harm's way by hospital staﬀ by not documenting properly. It would have resulted in catastrophe in the form of loss of limb or
even life, if patient was still sedated and had not complained of pain in shoulder.

Conclusion

A lifesaving procedure should not be turned into a life-threatening procedure just by documentation error. Any invasive pro-
cedure, no matter how small and quick, should be done according to standard protocols and should be documented. This case caused
a diagnostic dilemma on the MRI as it reﬂected impressions of bone edema and gas after the use of interosseous infusion in the
proximal humerus. Similar ﬁndings can be found in infection or osteomyelitis from gas forming organisms.

2

M.N.H. Khan, et al.

References

Trauma Case Reports 26 (2020) 100289

[1] M.W. Day, Intraosseous devices for intravascular access in adult trauma patients, Crit. Care Nurse 31 (2) (2011) 76–90. Apr 1.
[2] Anson, Jonathan A. Vascular access in resuscitation. Anesthesiology. 120(4):1015–31.
[3] B.A. Leidel, C. Kirchhoﬀ, V. Bogner, J. Stegmaier, W. Mutschler, K.-G. Kanz, et al., Is the intraosseous access route fast and eﬃcacious compared to conventional
central venous catheterization in adult patients under resuscitation in the emergency department? A prospective observational pilot study, Patient Saf Surg 3 (1)
(2009) 24.

[4] J. Molacek, K. Houdek, V. Opatrný, J. Fremuth, L. Sasek, I. Treskova, et al., Serious complications of Intraosseous access during infant resuscitation, Eur J Pediatr

Surg Rep. 6 (1) (2018) e59–e62 Jan.

[5] C.K. Drinker, K.R. Drinker, C.C. Lund, The circulation in the mammalian bone-marrow, Am J Physiol-Leg Content 62 (1) (1922 Sep) 1–92.
[6] M. Hansen, G. Meckler, D. Spiro, C. Newgard, Intraosseous line use, complications, and outcomes among a population-based cohort of children presenting to

California hospitals, Pediatr. Emerg. Care 27 (10) (2011) 928–932 Oct.

[7] T. Chalopin, A. Lemaignen, A. Guillon, A. Geﬀray, G. Derot, O. Bahuaud, et al., Acute Tibial osteomyelitis caused by intraosseous access during initial re-

suscitation: a case report and literature review, BMC Infect. Dis. 18 (1) (2018 Dec) 665.

[8] K.M. Thadikonda, F.M. Egro, I. Ma, A.M. Spiess, Deltoid compartment syndrome: a rare complication after humeral intraosseous access, Plast Reconstr Surg Glob

Open 5 (1) (2017 Jan) e1208.

[9] D. Jeﬀeries, M. Johnson, R. Griﬃths, A meta-study of the essentials of quality nursing documentation, Int. J. Nurs. Pract. 16 (2) (2010) 112–124. Apr.
[10] A. Andrews, B.S. Aubyn, If it’s Not Written Down; it Didn’t Happen…, 29(5) (2015), pp. 20–22.

3

