Trauma Case Reports 23 (2019) 100238

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Trauma Case Reports

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/tcr

Case Report
Handlebar versus gallbladder: A case of gallbladder rupture in
blunt thoracoabdominal trauma without other major injury
Elizabeth B. Lockie⁎, Samuel P. Banting, Aaron Y.S. Hui

Department of General Surgery, The Royal Melbourne Hospital, Australia

Case report

A 51-year-old male presented to the emergency department 4 h after falling oﬀ a pushbike onto his right side at 20 km/h. He
presented to hospital after initially returning home for a brief period, where he reported symptoms of dizziness and nausea and
noticed increased swelling to of right side of his abdomen. Primary assessment was signiﬁcant for blood pressure of 75/48 mmHg
(heart rate 86 bpm), which improved to 105/67 with 1 L intravenous 0.9% saline. Focused abdominal ultrasound showed free ﬂuid in
right upper quadrant. Secondary survey identiﬁed right chest wall tenderness, right upper quadrant tenderness and distension, and
grazes on the abdomen. He proceeded to contrast enhanced computer tomography (CT) that demonstrated haemoperitoneum, grade
II splenic laceration [2], right sixth to eighth rib fractures, and right transverse process fracture of the ﬁrst lumbar vertebra (Fig. 1).
The patient underwent an emergency trauma laparotomy, that revealed one litre haemoperitoneum, perforated gallbladder with free
gallbladder calculi, grade I duodenal haematoma and a grade II splenic laceration. The bleeding was from the gallbladder mucosa and
peritoneal covering; the duodenal and splenic injuries were not bleeding. His gallbladder was resected (Fig. 2), and calculi retrieved.
His gallbladder appeared ﬁbrosed, as conﬁrmed on histopathology that showed ﬁbrosis. The duodenum and spleen were managed
conservatively. He had an uncomplicated recovery post-operatively, with conservative management of the rib and vertebral fractures,
and was discharged home seven days later.

Discussion

Gallbladder rupture following blunt trauma is a rare condition, reported in only 2% of trauma laparotomies for blunt trauma, with
isolated gallbladder rupture occurring in under 1% of cases [1]. We present an interesting case of gallbladder rupture due to blunt
thoracoabdominal trauma, without other major injury.

Risk factors for gallbladder rupture are related to the mechanism of trauma and gallbladder factors. Gallbladder injuries are far
more likely in penetrating trauma than blunt trauma, the former accounting for 90% of gallbladder injuries [3,4]. In greater than 90%
of cases, there is other major intra-abdominal injury, most commonly to liver [4,5]. In this case, the mechanism of injury was direct
blunt trauma, likely from the pushbike handlebar, force applied directly to the gall bladder through the abdominal wall. Other minor
abdominal injuries reported, to the spleen and small bowel could also be attributable to the direct blow by the handle bars or the fall
itself.

Being a balloon-like structure, the risk of rupture is related to the wall thickness and ﬁlling of the gallbladder. The literature
describes that a thin-walled gallbladder is more prone to rupture in blunt trauma than a thick-walled ﬁbrosed gallbladder, and a
distended post-prandial gallbladder is also more likely to rupture [6]. In this case however, the patient had a ﬁbrosed gallbladder, and
it was likely not distended. Alcohol consumption has also been proposed as a risk factor for gallbladder rupture, through increasing
sphincter of Oddi tone thus biliary tract pressure [6], but we do not think it was a factor in this case.

Diagnosis of gallbladder rupture is often missed [6], due to low index of suspicion, variable clinical presentation, and variable

⁎ Corresponding author at: Royal Melbourne Hospital, 300 Grattan Street, Parkville, 3050, Australia.
E-mail address: Elizabeth.Lockie@mh.org.au (E.B. Lockie).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcr.2019.100238
Accepted 25 July 2019
Available online 31 July 2019
2352-6440/ © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).

E.B. Lockie, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 23 (2019) 100238

Fig. 1. Computer tomography scan demonstrating haematoma within gallbladder lumen and around gallbladder; (a) Axial slice; (b) Coronal slice.

Fig. 2. Resected gallbladder specimen.

imaging ﬁndings. The spectrum of contrast-enhanced CT ﬁndings includes pericholecystic ﬂuid, ill-deﬁned contour of the gallbladder
wall, high density intraluminal material (haemorrhage), active contrast extravasation into the lumen, and gallbladder collapse [ 7,8].
The addition of delayed post-contrast CT can assist in diﬀerentiating traumatic from nontraumatic conditions such as cholelithiasis,

2

E.B. Lockie, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 23 (2019) 100238

which can mimic intra-luminal haemorrhage, as haemorrhage will show an increase in amount of dense ﬂuid or extravasation on the
delayed phase [8]. In this case, diagnosis of gallbladder rupture was made intra-operatively, which is the more common situation. In
a retrospective review of 45 patients, diagnosis was made on CT in seven and intra-operatively in the remaining 38 patients [4]. In
this case, there were ﬁndings suggestive of gallbladder rupture on CT, including haematoma within the gallbladder lumen and
surrounding the gallbladder, but these ﬁndings were appreciated only by the radiologist, not by the emergency physicians or sur-
geons. This reﬂects the diﬃculty of diagnosis, even by experienced doctors in a trauma centre. Nevertheless, the treatment in this case
was not delayed, as decision for trauma laparotomy was made based on the positive abdominal ultrasound scan and haemodynamic
instability of the patient. The patient underwent cholecystectomy, the gold standard of management for gallbladder rupture [9].

Conclusion

This case is a rare example of gallbladder rupture without other major injury following blunt thoracoabdominal trauma, and it
illustrates the diﬃculties in diagnosis of this unusual injury. When managed promptly, the outcome of this injury has a good
prognosis.

Acknowledgements

We acknowledge the patient for giving permission to share his case.

Declaration of Competing Interest

We declare no competing interests.

References

[1] Kaehr D, Jones LM, Miller SF, Finley RK Jr. Traumatic cholecystectomy. J. Trauma 1984; 24(6); 544–5.
[2] E.E. Moore, T.H. Cogbill, M.A. Malangoni, G.J. Jurkovich, S.R. Shackford, H.R. Champion, J.W. McAninch, Organ injury scaling, Surg. Clin. North Am. 75 (1995)

293–303.

[3] R. Zellweger, P.H. Navsaria, F. Hess, J. Omoshoro-Jones, D. Kahn, A.J. Nicol, Gall bladder injuries as part of the spectrum of civilian abdominal trauma in South

Africa, ANZ J. Surg. 75 (7) (2005) 559–561.

[4] G.B. Ball, E. Dixon, A.W. Kirkpatrick, F.R. Sutherland, K.B. Laupland, D.V. Feliciano, A decade of experience with injuries to the gallbladder, J. Trauma Manag.

[5] O. Sharma, Blunt gallbladder injuries: presentation of twenty-two cases with review of the literature, J. Trauma 39 (3) (1995) 576–580.
[6] C.A. Soderstrom, K. Maekawa, R.W. DuPriest Jr., R.A. Cowley, Gallbladder injuries resulting from blunt abdominal trauma: an experience and review, Ann. Surg.

Outcomes 4 (3) (2010).

193 (1) (1981) 60–66.

[7] R.E. Erb, S.E. Mirvis, K. Shanmuganathan, Gallbladder injury secondary to blunt trauma: CT ﬁndings, J. Comput. Assist. Tomogr. 18 (5) (1994) 778–784.
[8] A.D. Lyles, J.T. Rexroad, Isolated traumatic gallbladder avulsion: a case report, Emerg. Radiol. 17 (5) (2010) 419–421.
[9] B.N. Thomson, B. Nardino, K. Gumm, A.J. Robertson, B.P. Knowles, N.A. Collier, R. Judson, Management of blunt and penetrating biliary tract trauma, J. Trauma

Acute Care Surg. 72 (6) (2012) 1620–1625.

3

