Trauma Case Reports 25 (2020) 100280

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Trauma Case Reports

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/tcr

Case Report
Lazarus phenomenon in trauma
Timothy Mahona, Piyush Kalakotib, Steven A. Conrada, Navdeep S. Samrac,⁎,
Mary Ann Edensa
a Department of Emergency Medicine, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, LA, United States
b Department of Neurosurgery, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, LA, United States
c Department of Trauma and Surgical Critical Care, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, LA, United States

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Lazarus phenomenon
Autoresuscitation
Spontaneous return of circulation
Trauma
Resuscitation
ROSC

Lazarus phenomenon embodies auto-resuscitation, aka the return of spontaneous circulation
following termination of cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Limited or no literature exists that de-
scribes auto-resuscitation in trauma. In the current report, we describe a case of an older woman
that presented with poly-traumatic injuries following a motor vehicle collision. The aggressive
resuscitation eﬀorts failed, and the patient witnessed a pulseless electrical activity; however,
nine-minutes after cessation of resuscitation eﬀorts, the patient experienced auto-resuscitation. In
addition to the sequel of events following the presentation, the report highlights the management
dilemma and ethical implications relating to the observation period for auto-resuscitation in
cases of donation after circulatory death, where the urgency to harvest the organs to ensure
maximum viability is in direct opposition to ensuring enough time has elapsed to rule out auto-
resuscitation. Guidelines on an appropriate period for observation in auto-resuscitation patients
queued for organ donation are warranted, keeping in lieu viability of organs following death.

Introduction

The “Lazarus Phenomenon” embodies the process of autoresuscitation and refers to the return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC)
following cessation of cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) [1,2]. Coined by Bray in a biblical reference to Lazarus, who was res-
urrected from the dead, it is often described in association with non-traumatic events such as acute coronary syndrome, cardiac
dysrhythmias, pulmonary embolism, metabolic derangements, etc. [3] The occurrence of Lazarus phenomenon in trauma is rare. The
current report describes a case of Lazarus phenomenon in an elderly female involved in a motor vehicle collision (MVC) and discusses
the potential ethical/moral implications that physicians in acute care settings should be made aware.

Case report

A 79-year-old Caucasian woman was referred to our Level-I trauma center for management of multiple injuries following an MVC
that occurred an hour before presentation. Medical history was signiﬁcant for atrial ﬁbrillation, hypertension, coronary artery dis-
ease, and hyperlipidemia. Before arrival at our center, initial evaluation at an outside hospital noted bilateral pneumothoraces, closed
fractures involving multiple ribs and the proximal femur on the right, abrasions with ecchymosis and a left renal laceration. Despite

⁎ Corresponding author at: Department of General Surgery, Division of Trauma and Surgical Critical Care, Louisiana State University Health

Sciences Center, Shreveport, LA 71103, United States.

E-mail address: nsamra@lsuhsc.edu (N.S. Samra).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcr.2020.100280
Accepted 5 January 2020
Available online 08 January 2020
2352-6440/ © 2020 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).

T. Mahon, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 25 (2020) 100280

aggressive resuscitation, the systolic blood pressure (SBP) and Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score dropped to 90 mmHg and 14,
respectively, which led to transfer to our center for higher care.

Upon arrival at our center (2 h after MVC, which includes a 15-minute transit time), no change was noted in her orientation (GCS
still 14). Ongoing blood transfusions initiated at the referring hospital stabilized her BP at 95/70 mmHg, heart rate (HR) at 99 beats/
min, respiratory rate (RR) 24 cycles/min, with 100% oxygen saturation (SpO2). Primary trauma survey noted intact airway,
breathing and circulation, and routine labs were ordered. Cranial/cervical spinal injuries were ruled out. The patient was neuro-
vascularly intact.

Ten minutes since arrival, rapid sequence intubation with etomidate and rocuronium was performed. Drop-in BP (64/38 mmHg),
and HR (83 beats/min) occurred. Out of concern that the previously inserted right-sided chest tube was now nonfunctional, a second
chest tube was secured ipsilaterally that resulted in an immediate rush of air and prompt drainage of 50 cc of blood. The patient
remained hypotensive as IV ﬂuid bolus and transfusion of red cells continued.

Five-minutes following chest tube insertion, the patient was noted to have pulseless electrical activity (PEA). Resuscitation,
according to Advanced Cardiac Life Support (ACLS) guidelines, was initiated. After the initial 1-mg IV epinephrine, she developed
ventricular ﬁbrillation. Despite continued resuscitation eﬀorts, the patient remained in PEA. Focused echocardiography conﬁrmed no
cardiac activity. Resuscitation eﬀorts stopped after a total of 9 min. Five-minutes after termination, a repeat echocardiogram also
noted no cardiac activity, and the family was informed of the patient's demise. Approximately nine-minutes after cessation of re-
suscitation, while performing post-mortem care, a registered nurse noted respiratory eﬀorts, heard air movement through the now
detached end of the endotracheal tube, and felt a strong radial pulse [HR 132 beats/min; BP 142/79 mmHg]. Her family was
informed about the ROSC. Ten-minutes later, BP and HR decreased to 100/53 mmHg and 100beats/min, respectively. A peripheral
epinephrine drip was initiated at 0.03 μg/kg/min.

Twenty-minutes following ROSC, BP fell to 83/40 mmHg and heart rate remained constant at 100beats/min. With a bolus of
normal saline and an epinephrine drip, a rebound increase in BP (130/77 mmHg) was observed. The patient continued to remain
hemodynamically unstable. Four-hours after ROSC, a pre-emptive selective coiling and arterial gel-foam embolization of the inferior
renal pole, for a concerning local hematoma producing a tamponade eﬀect, was performed. Resuscitation attempts continued. The
INR improved from over 23 to 6.76. Acidosis continued to worsen with pH dropping to 7.12 before rebounding back to 7.2 again. By
this time, 5 units of PRBCs, 4 units of FFP, 2 platelets concentrate, and 2 l of IV ﬂuids were transfused. Her GCS continued to remain
at 3 T with no observable neurological function including negative corneal reﬂexes. Ten-hours post auto-resuscitation, the patient
developed asystole. The patient's family opted to not resuscitate, and the patient died.

Discussion

Our report describes the sequence of clinical events in an elderly woman with polytrauma that was associated with ROSC during
management. Following a comprehensive review of literature, no reports on ROSC in acute traumatic events were retrieved. The
ethical challenge was having to inform the patient's family of her demise, only to change the decision 10-min later to report a
diﬀerent outcome owing to ROSC. While such events elicit emotional burden on the family, it undoubtedly engenders false hope on a
patients' survival and often may lead to doubts about the expertise/competence of the emergency response team responsible for
patient care.

An important aspect of ROSC is the formulation of appropriate guidelines relating the observation period before declaration of
death, especially in patients queued for organ donation. Knowledge of an appropriate consensus on waiting times for organ pro-
curement may enhance transplant care. Updated recommendations for ROSC waiting periods for donation after cardiac death (DCD)
ranges from 2 to 5 min [4,5], although older guidelines recommend waiting as long as 10 min [6]. This may be more appropriate
since most documented ROSC occurred within 10 min following cessation of CPR in 82% of cases with a mean delay of 7–8 min [4].
For providers working in acute care settings, it is pertinent to be aware of the ethical/moral complications relating to the waiting
period in cases of DCD, where the urgency to harvest the organs to ensure maximum viability is in direct opposition to ensuring
enough time has passed to rule out ROSC.

Sheth et al. investigated the waiting period for ROSC for DCD [7]. In single-center series of 73 patients, majority of who suﬀered
devastating brain injuries but not brain dead, the study noted that an observational period of only 2 min after asystole was entirely
suﬃcient and that DCD eﬀorts may be initiated promptly. However, there are no reports of ROSC in patients who did not receive CPR,
contrary to Sheth and colleagues where patients underwent withdrawal of life-supporting care. Additionally, the mechanisms of
death between uncontrolled cardiac death as seen in instances with CPR and continued partial perfusion, and controlled cardiac
death, where life-saving measures are withdrawn, are clearly diﬀerent [3]. Any discussion of a waiting period after uncontrolled
cardiac death that includes the possibility of DCD must include the inherent ethical dilemma between waiting to see if AR occurs and
the rush for organ procurement to maximize transplant organ viability. In an attempt to clear up the ethical argument of DCD, Shemie
[8] recommends brain activity using cerebral blood ﬂow as a surrogate marker as opposed to resumption of cardiac activity. [9] Any
loss of blood ﬂow to the brain greater than 20 s leads to some degree of permanent brain damage [10]. In the context of the Lazarus
Phenomenon where there is cessation of cerebral blood ﬂow for several minutes (9-min in our patient), severe and irreversible brain
damage must have occurred.

Conclusions

Patients with autoresuscitation may pose a dilemma to physicians especially those queued for organ donations. With no validated

2

T. Mahon, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 25 (2020) 100280

guidelines on the observational period to rule out AR in cases of cardiac death, we recommend using a cutoﬀ of 10-min with
assessment of cardiac/cerebral perfusion prior to organ harvesting. Although the concept of AR is medically and scientiﬁcally in-
triguing, loss of cerebral perfusion beyond 20 s creates a permanent loss of brain activity and may adversely impact multi-organ
functions. There have been documented eﬀorts that autoresuscitation does not occur without CPR, and thus controlled DCD should
not be as ethically controversial as it appears from a literature review.

Disclosures

Financial

None.

Study funding

None.

Acknowledgements

None.

Declaration of competing interest

None of the authors listed on the manuscript have any potential conﬂict of interest to report.

References

[1] J.G. Bray, The Lazarus phenomenon revisited, Anesthesiology 78 (1993) 991.
[2] K. Linko, P. Honkavaara, M. Salmenpera, Recovery after discontinued cardiopulmonary resuscitation, Lancet 1 (1982) 106–107.
[3] K. Hornby, L. Hornby, S.D. Shemie, A systematic review of autoresuscitation after cardiac arrest, Crit. Care Med. 38 (2010) 1246–1253.
[4] R. Herdman, T.L. Beauchamp, J.T. Potts, The Institute of Medicine’s report on non-heart-beating organ transplantation, Kennedy Inst. Ethics J. 8 (1998) 83–90.
[5] Ethics Committee ACoCCM, Society of Critical Care M. recommendations for nonheartbeating organ donation. A position paper by the ethics committee,

American College of Critical Care Medicine, Society of Critical Care Medicine, Crit. Care Med. 29 (2001) 1826–1831.

[6] G. Kootstra, Statement on non-heart-beating donor programs, Transplant. Proc. 27 (1995) 2965.
[7] K.N. Sheth, T. Nutter, D.M. Stein, T.M. Scalea, J.L. Bernat, Autoresuscitation after asystole in patients being considered for organ donation, Crit. Care Med. 40

[8] S.D. Shemie, Clarifying the paradigm for the ethics of donation and transplantation: was ‘dead’ really so clear before organ donation? Philos. Ethics Humanit.

(2012) 158–161.

Med. 2 (2007) 18.

[9] S.D. Shemie, C. Doig, B. Dickens, P. Byrne, B. Wheelock, G. Rocker, et al., Severe brain injury to neurological determination of death: Canadian forum re-

commendations, CMAJ 174 (2006) S1–13.

[10] J. Moss, M. Rockoﬀ, EEG monitoring during cardiac arrest and resuscitation, JAMA 244 (1980) 2750–2751.

3

