Trauma Case Reports 22 (2019) 100206

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Trauma Case Reports

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/tcr

Case Report
Motor vehicle collision with seatbelt sign and traumatic abdominal
wall hernia should raise suspicion for hollow viscus injury☆
Michael A. D'Elia⁎, R. Ian Grant, Nicole O. Kolozsvari, Maher M. Matar

Division of General Surgery, Department of Surgery, The Ottawa Hospital, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada

A R T I C L E I N F O

S U M M A R Y

Keywords:
High speed MVC
Seatbelt sign
Traumatic abdominal wall hernia
Hollow viscus injury

Case 1

Diagnosing hollow viscus injury following motor vehicle collision (MVC) requires a high index of
suspicion. Here we present two cases of high velocity MVC, with 3-point restrained occupants,
who presented with a seatbelt sign and associated acute traumatic ﬂank herniation. Both patients
underwent a computer tomography (CT) scan which did not identify any hollow viscus injuries.
Signiﬁcant injuries were ultimately identiﬁed in the operating room (OR). The presence of a
seatbelt sign and underlying acute traumatic hernia should prompt a heightened level of suspi-
cion for intra-abdominal injury, particularly hollow viscus. A heightened level of suspision and a
lower threshold for operative exploration is suggested to avoid the morbidity and mortality as-
sociated with a delayed diagnosis of hollow viscus injury.

A healthy 52 year old male presented to our level one trauma centre (L1TC) via ambulance approximately 30 min after sustaining
an MVC with signiﬁcant impact. On arrival in the trauma bay he was awake and oriented with a GCS of 15. He had good airway entry
bilaterally, with a seatbelt sign tracking across his left neck, chest and abdomen. He was tachycardic (heart rate of 120 bpm), but
responsive to a minimal ﬂuid challenge. Focussed assessment with sonography for trauma (FAST) scan was positive in Morrison's
pouch and the rectovesical pouch. A CT scan demonstrated active contrast extravasation from the small bowel mesentery with
moderate hemoperitoneum and a portion of proximal small bowel with diﬀerential enhancement suggestive of edema, without free
air. There was also an acute left lateral abdmoinal wall hernia, and a contained right renal injury, with no intra-peritoneal solid organ
injuries. Additional orthopedic injuries were noted. Given a transient response to ﬂuid challenge, with active extravasation on CT
scan and abdominal tenderness, the patient was brought to the OR for urgent laparotomy.

In the OR, 4 L of hemoperitoneum were evacuated and the mesenteric hemorrhage was identiﬁed at the distal ileum and con-
trolled with clips. At this site, there was a complete transection of the distal ileum, 15 cm proximal to the ileocecal valve. There were
2 additional small bowel antimesenteric blowout injuries identiﬁed, and a bucket-handle injury involving 15 cm of proximal ileum
(Fig. 1A). Within the colon, we identiﬁed a serosal injury with bruising at the distal sigmoid which, upon mobilization, revealed a
10 cm bucket-handle injury just proximal to the rectosigmoid junction. The traumatic ﬂank hernia seen on CT contained this portion
of the sigmoid colon. The patient's stability allowed for resection and successful primary anastomosis of all hollow viscus injuries.

☆ Portions of this manuscript were presented at the Trauma Association of Canada meeting in Calgary, Feb 28–Mar 1, 2019 as a poster pre-

sentation.

⁎ Corresponding author at: The Ottawa Hospital-Civic Campus, Division of Trauma, 1053 Carling Ave, Ottawa, ON K1Y 4E9, Canada.
E-mail address: mdelia@toh.ca (M.A. D'Elia).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcr.2019.100206
Accepted 27 April 2019
Available online 25 May 2019
2352-6440/ © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).

M.A. D'Elia, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 22 (2019) 100206

Fig. 1. Bucket handle injuries: Intraoperative photographs (A: Case 1, B: Case 2) demonstrating signiﬁcant bucket handle injuries of the small bowel.
(For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

Case 2

A healthy 56 year old female, with a history of Roux-en-Y gastric bypass for obesity, was transferred to our L1TC from a com-
munity hospital several hours post MVC, with hypotension (95/50 mm Hg) and abdominal pain. Her examination revealed multiple
bruises over her face and a seatbelt sign over her chest and abdomen. A CT scan identiﬁed a traumatic right ﬂank hernia containing
small bowel and ﬂuid, with only trace intra-abdominal free ﬂuid. There was no free air or evidence of any solid organ injury.
Additional orthopedic injuries were identiﬁed as well. Despite her relative stability, she was taken to the OR for exploratory la-
paroscopy due to abdominal pain out of proportion with her assessment.

In the OR, an initial laparoscopic reduction of the distal small bowel from the hernia revealed a bucket handle injury with bowel
ischemia precipitating a laparotomy (Fig. 1B). Overall, a total of 160 cm of proximal to mid-jejunum was noted to be ischemic and
thus resected with primary anastomosis. Along with this, a primary tissue closure of the right ﬂank hernia was performed. No other
abdominal injuries were identiﬁed.

Discussion

These cases highlight the destructive potential of high velocity MVC, even with relatively non-speciﬁc CT scan ﬁndings. In
particular, hollow viscus injuries that go undetected can have signiﬁcant ramiﬁcations. Even short delays in diagnosis and man-
agement of hollow viscus injuries can lead to signiﬁcant increases in morbidity and mortality [1].

Hollow viscus injuries are rare in blunt abdominal trauma and diﬃcult to identify in the initial trauma assessment, even with
adjuncts such as CT scans [2,3]. Highly speciﬁc, but uncommon ﬁndings, such as the presence of free air or oral contrast extra-
vasation, facilitate the diagnosis. However, more common ﬁndings, such as bowel wall enhancement or thickening, or the presence of
free ﬂuid are more sensitive, but have poor speciﬁcity [4,5]. Free ﬂuid in the abdomen can be attributed to a solid organ injury,
masking an underlying hollow viscus injury [6]. Furthermore, CT scans have been shown to carry a false negative rate of ap-
proximately 15% in diagnosing hollow viscus injury [2]. Although an observational approach can be employed for stable trauma
patients without overt objective ﬁndings of hollow viscus injury, a delay of 24 h in diagnosis can increase mortality from 2% to 30%
[1].

The presence of a seatbelt sign ecchymosis implies signiﬁcant impact and transfer of kinetic energy to the abdominal wall. It has
been shown that up to 10% of MVCs with a seatbelt sign suﬀer an underlying hollow viscus injury [7]. A study by Chandler et al.
showed that the presence of a seatbelt sign resulted in an increased presence of intra-abdominal injuries including small bowel
perforation, and an increased need for laparotomy [8]. Moreover, acute traumatic abdominal wall hernia following blunt trauma is a
very rare entity, identiﬁed in only 0.2% of all blunt traumas [9]. A review by Suhardja et al. demonstrated that 60% of patients with
blunt traumatic abdominal wall hernias had concurrent intra-abdominal injuries, of which 72% were hollow viscus in nature [10].
Increased impact velocity results in ampliﬁed transfer of kinetic energy, raising the potential for injury. A study by Lamielle et al.
demonstrated that vehicle speed at impact was directly proportional to the severity of intra-abdominal organ injuries identiﬁed. They
showed that a rise in impact velocity from 40 to 50 km/h compared to 70–79 km/h led to an increased rate of abdominal trauma from
2.75% to 24.62% respectively. Furthermore, examining the ratio of hollow viscus to solid organ injury at each respective speed,
showed an 11% increase (39% to 50%) in hollow viscus injury with this modest increases in velocity [11].

The presence of a seatbelt sign and an acute traumatic abdominal wall hernia following high speed MCV are an ominous com-
bination. This should be met with a hightened level of suspicion for intra-abdominal injury, particularly hollow viscous, irrespective

2

M.A. D'Elia, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 22 (2019) 100206

of the CT ﬁndings. Hollow viscus injuries are particularly diﬃcult to assess, and delays in management signiﬁcantly increase mor-
bidity and mortality. These cases highlight the destructive nature of high velocity blunt abdominal trauma and the heightened
suspicion necessary to allow for early diagnosis and management. In each case we were able to identify signiﬁcant pathology in the
OR which was not appreciated from the clinical exam or on imaging studies preoperatively.

References

[1] S.M. Fakhry, M. Brownstein, D.D. Watts, C.C. Baker, D. Oller, Relatively short diagnostic delays (< 8 hours) produce morbidity and mortality in blunt small
bowel injury: an analysis of time to operative intervention in 198 patients from a multicenter experience, J. Trauma 48 (2000) 408–414 (discussion 14-5).

[2] S.M. Fakhry, D.D. Watts, F.A. Luchette, Group EM-IHVIR, Current diagnostic approaches lack sensitivity in the diagnosis of perforated blunt small bowel injury:

analysis from 275,557 trauma admissions from the EAST multi-institutional HVI trial, J. Trauma 54 (2003) 295–306.

[3] D.D. Watts, S.M. Fakhry, Group EM-IHVIR, Incidence of hollow viscus injury in blunt trauma: an analysis from 275,557 trauma admissions from the East multi-

institutional trial, J. Trauma 54 (2003) 289–294.

[4] J.A. Soto, S.W. Anderson, Multidetector CT of blunt abdominal trauma, Radiology 265 (2012) 678–693.
[5] V. Virmani, U. George, B. MacDonald, A. Sheikh, Small-bowel and mesenteric injuries in blunt trauma of the abdomen, Can. Assoc. Radiol. J. 64 (2013) 140–147.
[6] J.M. Brody, D.B. Leighton, B.L. Murphy, G.F. Abbott, J.P. Vaccaro, L. Jagminas, et al., CT of blunt trauma bowel and mesenteric injury: typical ﬁndings and

pitfalls in diagnosis, Radiographics 20 (2000) 1525–1536 (discussion 36-7).

[7] G.S. Allen, F.A. Moore, C.S. Cox, J.T. Wilson, J.M. Cohn, J.H. Duke, Hollow visceral injury and blunt trauma, J. Trauma 45 (1998) 69–75 (discussion -8).
[8] C.F. Chandler, J.S. Lane, K.S. Waxman, Seatbelt sign following blunt trauma is associated with increased incidence of abdominal injury, Am. Surg. 63 (1997)

885–888.

[9] R.W. Dennis, A. Marshall, H. Deshmukh, J.S. Bender, N. Kulvatunyou, J.S. Lees, et al., Abdominal wall injuries occurring after blunt trauma: incidence and

grading system, Am. J. Surg. 197 (2009) 413–417.

[10] T.S. Suhardja, M.A. Atalla, W.M. Rozen, Complete abdominal wall disruption with herniation following blunt injury: case report and review of the literature, Int.

Surg. 100 (2015) 531–539.

[11] S. Lamielle, S. Cuny, J. Foret-Bruno, P. Petit, P. Vezin, J. Verriest, et al., Abdominal injury patterns in real frontal crashes: inﬂuence of crash conditions, occupant

seat and restraint systems, Annu. Proc. Assoc. Adv. Automot. Med. 50 (2006) 109–124.

3

