Trauma Case Reports 21 (2019) 100189

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Trauma Case Reports

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/tcr

Case Report
Two cases of penetrating left ventricular cardiac trauma: Pre-
hospital ultrasound and direct to theatre☆
Paul Hanleya,b,⁎, Joshua Holdena, Tamara Johnsonc, Alan Garnera,
Andrew Weatheralla
a CareFlight Rapid Response Helicopter (CRRH), CareFlight, Locked Bag 2002, Wentworthville, NSW 2145, Australia
b Royal Australian Army Medical Corps (RAAMC), Randwick Barracks, NSW 2032, Australia
c Western Sydney University School of Medicine, Locked Bag 1797, Penrith, NSW 2751, Australia

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Left ventricular (LV) Cardiac penetrating trauma is a rare and grave injury.

In cases of penetrating cardiac trauma, pre-hospital Ultrasound by ﬂight doctors can assist
identify speciﬁc pathology. This pre-hospital triage has now been linked to a change in both pre-
hospital and in-hospital management.

There are minimal cases reported where Pre-Hospital ultrasound provided deﬁnitive diagnosis
and, while providing Pre-Hospital blood transfusion, informed a direct to theatre approach. In
2017 in New South Wales, Australia, a new protocol “Code Crimson” has been introduced to
formalise a system wide process where Pre-Hospital medical teams can expedite a straight to
Theatre approach.

Keywords:
Left ventricle
Penetrating trauma
Trauma
Pre-hospital
Ultrasound

Case presentations

Case 1

A 28-year-old otherwise healthy male sustained two stab wounds to the right chest. The Care Flight Rapid Response Helicopter
(CRRH) staﬀed by a retrieval physician and advanced care paramedic was airborne 3 min after notiﬁcation. The Team was at the
patient 21 min later. At initial assessment the patient was pale and diaphoretic. A systolic blood pressure (BP) of 70 mmHg, heart rate
(HR) 136, respiratory rate (RR) of 30, SpO2 of 100% on room air and Glasgow coma scale (GCS) of 14.

Intravenous (IV) access obtained. The physician performed an extended focused assessment with sonography for trauma (EFAST).
A large pericardial eﬀusion was observed with features of tamponade including right ventricular systolic collapse, right atrial dia-
stolic collapse and a distended inferior vena cava (IVC). A decision was made to transport immediately by air (see also Fig. 1).

The team departed with patient 17 min after arrival. 1 unit of red cell concentrate (RCC) and 500 mL of crystalloid were ad-
ministered. The receiving Major Trauma Centre was advised of the EFAST ﬁndings. The receiving Cardiothoracic Service and
Operating Theatre (OT) were prepared for patient arrival. The local Massive Transfusion Protocol (MTP) was activated. During ﬂight
a further 120 mL RCC was transfused and the patient received 1 g of IV Tranexamic Acid (TXA).

After a 20 min ﬂight the patient was met on the helipad by the Trauma Team Leader and transported directly to the OT. He

☆ This work has not been presented wholly or in part at any meeting.
⁎ Corresponding author at: CareFlight, Locked Bag 2002, Wentworthville, NSW 2145, Australia.
E-mail addresses: paul.hanley@careﬂight.org (P. Hanley), joshua.holden@careﬂight.org (J. Holden), alan.garner@careﬂight.org (A. Garner),

andrew.weatherall@careﬂight.org (A. Weatherall).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcr.2019.100189
Accepted 7 April 2019
Available online 13 April 2019
2352-6440/ © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).

P. Hanley, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 21 (2019) 100189

Fig. 1. Careﬂight Rapid Response Helicopter (CRRH) Service Helicopters over Sydney Harbour, Sydney, Australia.
The second Helicopter in the image was ﬂown on both missions.
A Model BK 117 Helicopter, Call sign VH-IME
Photography credits Mr. Paul Sadler c/o CRRH.

arrived in theatre 37 min after patient contact with Retrieval team from a distance of 84 km by direct ﬂight. Emergency Sternotomy
and mini thoracotomy revealed a left lower chest wound penetrating the chest wall with entry into the LV myocardium and a ﬁve-
millimetre wound lateral and distal to the Left Anterior Descending Coronary Artery with active bleeding. There was also a 500 mL
haemothorax in the left thoracic cavity. These injuries were surgically repaired. The patient was extubated immediately post op-
eratively, discharged from intensive care the following day, and made a full recovery.

Case 2

A 52-year-old otherwise healthy male received two stab wounds to the chest and a laceration to his left wrist. The CRRH was
airborne three minutes after tasking and arrived at the patient 29 min later. A road EMS crew had already obtained IV access,
performed needle decompression of the left hemi thorax and administered oxygen after ﬁnding the patient was agitated with SpO2 of
80%. Upon arrival of the CRRH team, the patient had SpO2 of 99% on 15 l via non-rebreather mask, a systolic BP of 82 mmHg, HR of
115, RR of 15, and GCS of 10.

The physician performed an EFAST, identifying a large pericardial eﬀusion with features of tamponade and a large left hae-
mopneumothorax. 1 unit RCC and 500 mL of compound sodium lactate were infused, followed by rapid sequence intubation (RSI),
left thoracostomy and pleural drain insertion.

After 30 min on scene, the retrieval team transferred the patient, administering TXA 1 g in ﬂight, three units of RCC and a further
1000 mL of compound sodium lactate to maintain systolic BP between 70 and 80 mmHg. Flight time was 16 min to travel 75 km. The
hospital was notiﬁed of EFAST ﬁndings and patient condition during ﬂight and Cardiothoracic Surgery team and the OT were
activated. The retrieval team was met on the helipad by the Trauma Team with a further 2 units RCC. The patient proceeded directly
to the OT and arrived there 66 min following initial patient contact. See Fig. 2.

At left thoracotomy a profusely bleeding left internal mammary artery was revealed. The patient had a laceration to the left lower
lobe of the lung that went through pericardium and penetrated the left ventricle. The patient remained intubated post operatively and
underwent surgery the following day for removal of thoracic packs and deﬁnitive closure of his chest. He was extubated 2 days after
injury, discharged from ICU a day later, and made a full recovery. See. Table 1.

Discussion

The state of New South Wales (NSW) in Australia has an area of 800,000 km2. This is approximately three times larger than the
entire United Kingdom and twice as large as Germany. It is often challenging to minimise time to transport trauma patients to
deﬁnitive medical interventions. The ability of Pre-Hospital Medical teams to obtain diagnoses, exercise high level clinical decision-
making and notify Hospital services before arrival at Hospital can provide these patients with time critical care (See Fig. 3).

2

P. Hanley, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 21 (2019) 100189

Fig. 2. Intraoperative photograph of case 2 patient on the operating table.
Photography credits Dr. Joshua Holden (CRRH).

We present two cases with isolated penetrating stab injuries to the chest that penetrated the Left Ventricle. Both injuries occurred
remote from the nearest trauma centre and both resulted in cardiac tamponade. Both with prolonged time to deﬁnitive care and a
poor prognosis [1].

Diagnosis of pathology using pre-hospital ultrasound is now being supported by the literature [2,3]. These patients received an in-
ﬂight red cell concentrate transfusion. Early Pre-Hospital blood transfusion is associated with improved survival [4]. There was Pre-
Hospital activation of the Hospital massive transfusion protocol and activation of the Cardiothoracic Surgery team and an Operating
Theatre. Each patient was then transferred directly from the helipad to the OT.

In these two cases, a direct transfer from the helicopter to the OT shortened this process even more.
Previously trauma centers in Australia had diﬀerent approaches for receiving patients like these.
A recently introduced statewide protocol aims to formalise and expedite the process from retrieval, through the emergency

3

P. Hanley, et al.

Table 1
Patient treatments in Flight.

Treatment given

O2

IntraVenous access,

Intravenous ﬂuids

Cardiac tamponade on extended focused assessment with

sonograpy in trauma (EFAST)

Blood transfusion

with packed red blood cells (PRBC) unit
(1 unit = 300 mL)
Chest decompression

Pre hospital intubation
Tranexamic acid
Prehospital thoracotomy

Trauma Case Reports 21 (2019) 100189

Patient 1

Patient 2

Non rebreather mask
15 L
Yes,
500 mL Hartmanns
Yes

Non rebreather mask
15 L
Yes,
500 mL Hartmanns
Yes

Yes 1 unit PRBC + further 120 mL
PRBCS.

Yes 1 unit PRBC

Yes
intercostal catheter

NO
YES 1 GRAM intravenous
No

Yes road crew
left needle decompression, thoracostomy, then left
intercostal catheter
YES
YES 1 GRAM intravenous
No

department to intervention for patients with non-compressible, life-threatening haemorrhage (Fig. 3). Following a Pre-hospital ac-
tivation, the protocol standardises Emergency room responses (Fig. 4), Facilitating streamlined surgical decision-making at the
receiving hospital.

The importance of time to deﬁnitive treatment in trauma patients is documented [5]. This is particularly relevant for hypotensive
patients with non-compressible penetrating thoracic injuries, as longer transport times are associated with higher mortality. Mini-
mizing time from injury to OT is a challenge in Australia, where long transport times are common. Pre-hospital ultrasound, pre-
hospital transfusions, and a rapid transfer to the Trauma Centre are only of beneﬁt to the patient if this hard won precious time is
respected and matched by the processes within the receiving Hospital itself.

Both patients survived neurologically intact this often-fatal injury.

List of abbreviations

NSW ITIM NSW Institute of Trauma and Injury Management
LV
OT
MTC
MERT
BP
HR
RR
GCS
EFAST
IVC
CRRH
MTP
TXA
IV
RSI

Left Ventricular
Operating Theatre
Major Trauma Centre
Medical Emergency Response Team
Blood Pressure
Heart Rate
Respiratory Rate
Glasgow Coma Scale
Extended Focused Assessment with Sonography for Trauma
Inferior Vena Cava
CareFlight Rapid Response Helicopter
Massive Transfusion Protocol
Tranexamic acid
Intravenous
Rapid sequence intubation

Author's contributions

PH and JH collated the patient case information. PH and TJ performed the literature review. PH, TJ and wrote the manuscript and
prepared it for publication. AG and AW revised the manuscript prior to submission. All authors read and approved the ﬁnal
manuscript.

Ethics approval and consent to participate

Not applicable.

Consent for publication

Written informed consent was obtained from the patients for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of

4

P. Hanley, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 21 (2019) 100189

Persistent haemodynamic instability despite standard trauma care*, 

assessed as being secondary to ongoing haemorrhage in blunt or penetrating trauma

Yes

Unresponsive to intravenous fluids 

and or blood transfusion

No

Yes

Does not meet pre-hospital 

trauma ‘Code Crimson’

activation criteria

Continue to re-assess and manage*

Meets pre-hospital trauma ‘Code Crimson’ activation criteria

Continue providing standard trauma care*
Notify receiving hospital ED as soon as practicable via “Batphone”
Clearly identify “pre-hospital activation of trauma ‘Code Crimson’”
Provide pre-hospital notification in IMIST format including estimated time of arrival and 
probable source of haemorrhage

* Standard trauma care (irrespective of activation)

Assess and manage the patient as per trauma policies and procedures including:

Airway patent and protected (patient alert or endotracheal tube insitu)
Significant pneumothorax excluded or managed
Pelvic and limb fractures excluded or splinted
External haemorrhage treated (where feasible)

Fig. 3. Activation of code crimson by pre-hospital medical service.
Flow chart of NSW Government policy. Courtesy of ITIM – NSW Institute of Trauma and Injury Management.

the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this Journal.

Availability of data and material

Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no datasets were generated or analysed during the current study.

Competing interests

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

5

P. Hanley, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 21 (2019) 100189

Trauma ‘Code Crimson’ activated by pre-hospital medical retrieval team

ED to confirm “pre-hospital activation of trauma ‘Code Crimson’ ”

Document pre-hospital notification from retrieval team in IMIST format

Activate trauma team – for example, “Trauma Attend”

Notify Surgical Consultant / Fellow on for Trauma via phone – immediate response required 

Notify other relevant subspecialty surgical Consultant / Fellow

Notify Radiographer – to be present in resuscitation room

Confirm Operating Theatre / Interventional Radiology room and staff availability

Mobilise additional theatre / radiology team if necessary

Notify blood bank – activate Massive Transfusion Protocol

2 units uncrossmatched Red Blood Cells to be available immediately in ED and or helipad

Blood Bank to thaw and supply uncrossmatched Fresh Frozen Plasma

ED fluid warmer and or rapid infuser primed with blood

Trauma Team reception of patient in ED

Handover and initial assessment (primary survey)

Rapid decision (<10 minutes) for disposition

Surgical Consultant or Fellow +/- Trauma Consultant to decide: 

Operating Theatre / Interventional Radiology / Computer Tomography

Fig. 4. Code crimson actioned by receiving trauma centre.
Flow chart of NSW Government Policy. Courtesy of ITIM – NSW Institute of Trauma and Injury Management.

6

P. Hanley, et al.

Funding

There was no funding for this paper.

Acknowledgements

Not applicable.

References

Trauma Case Reports 21 (2019) 100189

[1] M. Bamous, A. Abdessamad, J. Tadili, A. Kettani, M. Faroudy, Evaluation of penetrating cardiac stab wounds, Scand. J. Trauma Resusc. Emerg. Med. 24 (2016).
[2] D. O'Dochartaigh, M. Douma, Prehospital ultrasound of the abdomen and thorax changes trauma patient management: a systematic review, Injury 46 (2015)

2093–2102.

[3] V.S. Tayal, M.A. Beatty, J.A. Marx, C.A. Tomaszewski, M.H. Thomason, FAST (focused assessment with sonography in trauma) accurate for cardiac and in-

traperitoneal injury in penetrating anterior chest trauma, J. Ultrasound Med. 23 (2004) 467–472.

[4] Kotwal R, Scott L, Janak J, Tarpey B, Howard J, Mazuchowski L, Butler F, Shackelford S, Gurney J, Stockinger Z.: The eﬀect of prehospital transport time, injury

severity, and blood transfusion on survival of US military casualties in Iraq. J. Trauma Acute Care Surg.: July 2018 – Volume 85 – Issue 1S – pS112-S121.
[5] M. Swaroop, D.C. Straus, O. Agubuzu, T.J. Esposito, C.R. Schermer, M.L. Crandall, Pre-hospital transport times and survival for hypotensive patients with

penetrating thoracic trauma, J. Emerg. Trauma Shock 6 (2013) 16–20.

7

