Trauma Case Reports 10 (2017) 16–18

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Trauma Case Reports

j o ur n a l h o m e p a g e : w ww . e l s e v i e r . c om / l o c a t e / t c r

Case Report
Ureteric transection secondary to penetrating handlebar injury
K.P. Debbink a,⁎, D.B. Tashjian b, M.V. Tirabassi b, R. Gaffey a, J. Nahmias a
a Baystate Medical Center, Springﬁeld, MA, United States
b Baystate Children's Hospital, Springﬁeld, MA, United States

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Accepted 16 July 2017
Available online 31 July 2017

Keywords:
Ureter
Bicycle
Handlebar
Penetrating

Introduction

Ureteric trauma is rare, occurring in b1% of all traumas. We present a unique case of a 13 year
old female who sustained a penetrating abdominal injury from a bicycle handlebar. Upon initial
examination there was herniation of bowel through the abdominal wound, so exploratory lap-
arotomy was performed. A serosal injury of the colon and bleeding mesenteric veins were en-
countered; the retroperitoneum was not explored at that time. Postoperative course was
remarkable for a doubling of the serum creatinine, increasing abdominal distention and pain.
Computed tomography on postoperative day ﬁve demonstrated a large amount of intra-
abdominal ﬂuid. The patient was taken for re-exploration. The left ureter was found to be
completely transected. It was repaired over a double-J stent. This case demonstrates the need
for a high index of suspicion in the diagnosis of ureteric injury.
© 2017 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Penetrating abdominal trauma secondary to bicycle handlebars is rare. Most reports regarding handlebar injuries in the liter-
ature are related to traumatic abdominal wall hernias, solid organ injury, or bowel injury [1–4]. Likewise, ureteric injury related to
external trauma is also rare, with even the busiest adult trauma centers typically seeing fewer than 10 cases per year [5]. We
present a unique case of ureteric injury due to penetrating handlebar injury.

Details

An otherwise healthy 13 year old female presented to the trauma bay after a bicycle accident. Primary survey was within nor-
mal limits with vital signs appropriate for age and Glasgow Coma Score of 15. Secondary survey was remarkable for a deep
3 centimeter (cm) laceration in the left lower quadrant. There was active bleeding from the wound, with bowel herniating
through a fascial defect. Given these ﬁndings the patient was brought to the operating room for exploration.

An exploratory laparotomy was performed via extension of the existing wound. The underlying fascial defect was found to be
approximately 5 cm. A serosal tear on the sigmoid colon was identiﬁed and over-sewn. Venous bleeding from the base of the sig-
moid mesentery was controlled with suture ligation. No further injuries were identiﬁed and no additional hemorrhage or ﬂuid
was noted. The complex abdominal wall injury was repaired primarily.

Routine admission urinalysis revealed microscopic hematuria, so computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis with
intravenous (IV) contrast was obtained post-operatively. No further traumatic injury was identiﬁed, however delayed images

⁎ Corresponding author at: Baystate Medical Center, 759 Chestnut St, Springﬁeld, MA 01199, United States.

E-mail address: kait.petros@gmail.com (K.P. Debbink).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tcr.2017.07.002
2352-6440/© 2017 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

K.P. Debbink et al. / Trauma Case Reports 10 (2017) 16–18

17

were not obtained. A cystogram was obtained which did not demonstrate injury to the bladder. The patient's postoperative course
was notable for a doubling of the serum creatinine from 0.6 mg/dL (53.04 μmol/L) to 1.2 mg/dL (106.08 μmol/L). She also expe-
rienced ongoing abdominal pain, increasing distention and nausea. A retroperitoneal ultrasound was unremarkable except for
large volume ascites. A non-contrast repeat CT of the abdomen and pelvis on postoperative day ﬁve demonstrated a large amount
of ascites with a density of simple ﬂuid.

The patient underwent repeat laparotomy. Upon entry to the abdomen three liters of ﬂuid was drained, and intraoperative
analysis revealed a ﬂuid creatinine of 4.6 mg/dL (406.64 μmol/L). The left ureter was found to be transected near the middle
third with the two ends approximately 2.5 cm apart. Ureterogram was performed via the transected ends to conﬁrm anatomy
(Fig. 1). Primary repair over a double-J stent was performed with 5-0 Vicryl and a drain left in place in the retroperitoneum.

Post-operatively the patient recovered well and was discharged ﬁve days later after the operative drain was removed. The
double-J stent was removed at postoperative week six with concurrent cystoscopy and retrograde ureterogram demonstrating
a normal ureter with no evidence of stricture.

Discussion

Most bicycle-related incidents described in the literature deal with head trauma. Handlebar injury is also an important mech-
anism of bicycle-related trauma, and the associated morbidity is underappreciated. Most cases described in the literature are sec-
ondary to blunt trauma. The most common injuries described include bowel perforation, solid organ injury, and traumatic
abdominal wall hernia [1–4]. In a retrospective review by Nadler et al., 31% of children sustaining direct-impact handlebar injuries
required operative intervention.

Ureteric injuries account for b1% of all urologic traumas [6], with the majority being a result of penetrating trauma. Table 1
data compiled from the National Trauma Database shows the varying mechanisms of ureteric injury [7]. The most common mech-
anism by far for injury to the ureter is gunshot wound. The diagnosis of ureteric injury is challenging and often delayed or missed.
Urinalysis results are unreliable and highly variable. One case series found only 44% of patients with ureteric injury had hematuria
on the initial admission urinalysis [8], and most studies demonstrate a rate of hematuria between 40 and 75% [6,9,10]. Imaging
studies are also frequently unreliable. A retrospective review of traumatic ureteric injury by Medina et al. found that only 40%
of patients with ureteric injury had positive ﬁndings on preoperative imaging studies [9]. Computed tomography is often used
in trauma, however the timing of IV contrast utilized for most trauma evaluations does not adequately visualize the ureters
[10]; delayed phase images must be included if there is any suspicion of ureteric injury. Cystoscopy with retrograde
ureterogram/pyelogram is historically the most accurate way of identifying ureteric injury, but may not be feasible in a hemody-
namically unstable trauma patient.

Due to a high rate of concomitant injuries many ureteric injuries are diagnosed intra-operatively during exploration for other
reasons. This can pose a challenge for the surgeon as hemorrhage or spillage of intestinal contents can make detecting leakage of a
small amount of urine difﬁcult. Evidence of violation of the retroperitoneum should raise concern for possible ureteric injury. Ap-
proximately 60% of injuries occur in the proximal ureter [8]. The type of operative repair varies based on the location of the injury

Fig. 1. Intraoperative ureterogram. (A) extravasation of contrast at mid portion of ureter. (B) Post-repair image showing placement of double J stent.

18

K.P. Debbink et al. / Trauma Case Reports 10 (2017) 16–18

Table 1
Mechanism of ureteric injury.

Blunt trauma

Motor vehicle collision
Pedestrian
Motorcyclist
High fall
Low fall
Cyclist
Other

Penetrating trauma
Gunshot wound
Stab
Other

n

224
110
25
18
15
8
3
45
358
316
29
13

% of total cases

38
19
4
3
3
1
b1
8
62
54
5
2

Table 2
Pertinent reconstructive options, based on location.

Upper third

Middle third

Lower third

Uretero-ureterostomy
Ureteropyelostomy
Uretero-ureterostomy
Transuretero-ureterostomy
Anterior wall bladder ﬂap (Boari)
Ureteroneocystostomy (direct reimplantation)
Ureteroneocystostomy (psoas hitch)

(see Table 2) [8]. Regardless of the location of injury, the basic tenets of repair always involve debridement to healthy tissue and
tension-free anastomosis over a stent with absorbable suture.

Conclusions

A high index of suspicion is necessary for timely diagnosis of ureteric injuries. Computed tomography imaging may be useful
but must include delayed phase imaging to properly evaluate the ureters. Cystoscopy with retrograde ureterogram is the most
reliable method of identifying a ureteric injury. Intra-operative discovery of retroperitoneal violation warrants further exploration,
with identiﬁcation of ureteric trauma prompting an appropriate repair based on the location of the injury.

References

[1] I. Karaman, A. Karaman, M.K. Aslan, D. Erdoğan, Y.H. Cavuşoğlu, O. Tütün, A hidden danger of childhood trauma: bicycle handlebar injuries, Surg. Today 39 (7)

(2009) 572–574.

[2] E.P. Nadler, D.A. Potoka, B.L. Shulz, K.E. Morrison, H.R. Ford, B.A. Gaines, The high morbidity associated with handlebar injuries in children, J. Trauma 58 (6) (2005)

[3] J. Goliath, V. Mittal, J. McDonough, Traumatic handlebar hernia: a rare abdominal wall hernia, J. Pediatr. Surg. 39 (10) (2004) 20–22.
[4] T.D. Clarnette, S.W. Beasley, Handlebar injuries in children: patterns and prevention, Aust. N. Z. J. Surg. 67 (6) (1997) 338–339.
[5] S.B. Brandes, M.J. Chelsky, R.F. Buckman, R.M. Hanno, Ureteral injuries from penetrating trauma, J. Trauma 36 (6) (1994) 766–769.
[6] J.C. Presti Jr., P.R. Carroll, J.W. McAninch, Ureteral and renal pelvic injuries from external trauma: diagnosis and management, J. Trauma 29 (3) (1989) 370–374.
[7] S.M. Siram, S.Z. Gerald, W.R. Greene, et al., Ureteral trauma: patterns and mechanisms of injury of an uncommon condition, Am. J. Surg. 199 (2010) 566–570.
[8] Pereira BMT, M.P. Ogilvie, J.C. Gomez-Rodriguez, et al., A review of ureteral injuries after external trauma, Scand. J. Trauma 18 (6) (2010).
[9] D. Medina, R. Lavery, S.E. Ross, D.H. Livingston, Ureteral trauma: preoperative studies neither predict injury nor prevent missed injuries, J. Am. Coll. Surg. 186

1171–1174.

(1998) 641–644.

[10] L.S. Palmer, R.R. Rosenbaum, M.D. Gershbaum, E.R. Kreutzer, Penetrating ureteral trauma at an urban trauma center: 10-year experience, Urology 54 (1999)

34–36.

