9 108
Customised proximal femoral nail in treatment of intertrochanteric

fracture with ipsilateral femoral shaft malunion: A case report

Siddharth Dubeya, R. Dinesh Iyera,⁎, Md Quamar Azamb, Bhaskar Sarkara



a Dept of Trauma Surgery (Orthopaedics), AIIMS, Rishikesh, Uttarakhand, India

b Dept of Trauma Surgery, AIIMS, Rishikesh, Uttarakhand, India



A R T I C L E I N F O



A B S T R A C T



Keywords:

Intertrochanteric fractures

Customised nail

PFN

Fragility fractures

Malunited shaft femur

Stress riser



Introduction



Peritrochanteric fractures are the most common fragility fractures for which patient are admitted

in hospital and often require surgical interventions. With increasing life expectancy and early age

of presentation, revision surgeries are increasing due to re-trauma, implant failure, infections etc.

Here we present the case of a 65 years female, with inter trochanteric fracture femur right side

with ipsilateral malunited proximal femur fracture, which was managed with customised prox-

imal femoral nail.



This case exempliﬁes the need for novel techniques and implants in our armamentarium to



deal with such unusual fractures in elderly population.



Osteoporosis is a major health problem in the elderly and frequently leads to fragility fracture, the most debilitating of them being

fractures around hip. The demographics of world populations are set to change, with more elderly living in developing countries, and

it has been estimated that by 2050 half of hip fractures will occur in Asia [1,2].



Here we present the case of a 65 years female, with inter trochanteric fracture femur right side with ipsilateral malunited



proximal femur fracture, which was managed with customised proximal femoral nail.



Case



A 65 years female, presented to the emergency department of our hospital with history of slip and fall in bathroom. Patient

complained of severe pain around right hip and inability to bear weight since trauma. Patient was managed as per ATLS protocol.

After primary survey, local examination of right hip revealed swelling and ecchymosis. On palpation, tenderness was present, passive

movement of hip joint was painful and distal pulsations were palpable.



Patient revealed about previous trauma (RTA 15 years back) which was managed conservatively. Radiographs revealed inter-



trochanteric fracture (AO/OTA 31A1.2) [3] with malunited femoral shaft fracture at proximal–mid junction (Figs. 1 and 2).



Patient was admitted with skin traction. Patient and her family members were explained the need for surgery and both informed



and written consent was taken.



Pre operative planning focused on various available options, including DHS and intramedullary device. However, the shortest

cephalomedullary nail available in our hospital was of 170 mm, which would not been possible to negotiate through the malunited



⁎ Corresponding author at: Dept of Trauma Surgery, AIIMS, Rishikesh 249203, Uttarakhand, India.

E-mail address: iyerdinesh212@gmail.com (R.D. Iyer).



https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcr.2020.100348

Accepted 27 July 2020

Available online 29 July 2020

2352-6440/ © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 

(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).



S. Dubey, et al.



Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100348



Fig. 1. Pre operative radiograph showing inter trochanteric fracture (AO/OTA 31A1.2) and malunited femur.



Fig. 2. Pre operative radiograph showing inter-trochanteric fracture (AO/OTA 31A1.2) and malunited femur.



portion of femur. So a customised nail for the patient was made by cutting the distal portion of nail after measurement in radiograph.

The length from tip to greater trochanter to the malunited site was measured over plain radiograph and nail was cut just shy of



that length pre operatively.



Patient was treated by closed reduction internal ﬁxation with customised PFNA2. Hospital stay was uneventful. Patient was



discharged on advice for partial weight bearing with walker support. Sutures were removed after 2 weeks (Figs. 3 and 4).



After 3 months follow up patient was asymptomatic, walking comfortably with the help of stick. Radiographs showing signs of



union, proper positioning of implant and no radiological changes at the tip of implant abutting over the malunited portion.



2



S. Dubey, et al.



Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100348



Fig. 3. Post operative AP radiograph with customised PFNA2 showing proper reduction and implant positioning.



Fig. 4. Post operative lateral radiograph with customised PFNA2 showing proper reduction and implant positioning.



Discussion

