9 76
Delayed cardiac tamponade following blunt chest trauma due to

disruption of fourth costal cartilage with posterior dislocation

S. Mohameda, A. Osmana, A. Patela,b,⁎, K. Mazhara, L. Srinivasana,

L. Balacumaraswamia

a Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Royal Stoke University Hospital, Stoke On Trent, United Kingdom

b Institute of Immunology and Immunotherapy, University of Birmingham, Vincent Drive, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, United Kingdom



A R T I C L E I N F O



A B S T R A C T



Keywords:

Cardiac tamponade

Haemothorax

Pneumothorax

Thoracoscopy

Costal cartilage



Introduction



Cardiac tamponade is a recognised sequelae of non-penetrating and penetrating chest trauma.

Delayed cardiac tamponade has been described following blunt chest trauma. We present a

29 year-old gentleman who had initially presented to peripheral district general hospital fol-

lowing direct blunt chest wall trauma. His initial trauma CT demonstrated a small mediastinal

haematoma and large left haemopneumothorax and disruption/dislocation of the costal cartilage.

He initially underwent a thoracoscopic procedure uneventfully. He then had worsening chest

radiograph appearances with enlarging cardiac contours. Transthoracic echocardiography con-

ﬁrmed cardiac tamponade. He underwent creation of a pericardial window and excision of the

protruding fourth costal cartilage.



Cardiac tamponade is a recognised sequelae of non-penetrating and penetrating chest trauma. However, blunt chest trauma rarely

leads to cardiac tamponade hence the management is often guided by development of symptoms and ﬁndings on imaging [1]. There

are several case reports which mention the development of cardiac tamponade following minor and more signiﬁcant chest wall

trauma with usual onset of symptoms 4–6 weeks following the injury [1,2]. Cardiac tamponade following blunt chest trauma can be

attributable to multiple causes and the diagnosis is conﬁrmed from the ﬂuid that is aspirated/drained. Serous ﬂuid often indicative of

a reactive process from resultant myocarditis/pericarditis or as a post-cardiac injury syndrome. Haemorrhagic ﬂuid is indicative of

direct cardiac injury. The mechanism in the development of haemorrhagic cardiac tamponade following blunt chest wall trauma can

be related to a sheer-stress acceleration/deceleration injury resulting in an avulsion/traction type injury to the heart. Furthermore,

cardiac tamponade can occur as a late sequelae of myocardial contusion and through the laceration of the right ventricle [3]. The

clinical presentation of these patients can have a wide degree of variance from initially patients who have distracting injuries as part

of their poly-trauma or patients who are initially asymptomatic due to no pericardial collection but developing progressive dyspnoea

and symptoms of heart failure as the pericardial tamponade evolves. Transthoracic echocardiography conﬁrms the diagnosis fol-

lowing initial identiﬁcation of a pericardial collection on computer tomography or magnetic resonance imaging. We describe an

unusual case of delayed cardiac tamponade following blunt chest wall trauma due to the mechanism of right ventricular injury

secondary to left costal cartilage disruption causing three weeks after the index injury.



⁎ Corresponding author at: Institute of Immunology and Immunotherapy, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, United



Kingdom.



E-mail address: ajp.788@gmail.com (A. Patel).



https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcr.2020.100340

Accepted 27 July 2020

Available online 28 July 2020

2352-6440/ Crown Copyright © 2020 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 

(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).



S. Mohamed, et al.



Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100340



Fig. 1. Panel A - CT scan demonstrating, a. large left haemothorax (arrow), and b. left fourth rib fracture and disruption/dislocation of the costal

cartilage medially (circled). Panels B and C - chest radiographs taken one week apart showing sizable increase in cardiac contours; A. on admission,

B. one week post admission.



Case discussion

