9 48
Anterior inferior iliac spine avulsion fracture post hip arthroscopy

for Femoroacetabular impingement☆,☆☆

Joseph Maalouly, Dany Aouad⁎, Rami Ayoubi, Nabil Dib, Mohammad Darwish,

Elias Saidy, Alexandre Nehme

Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Traumatology Saint Georges University Medical Center, Balamand University, P.O. Box 166378 Achraﬁeh, Beirut

1100 2807, Lebanon

St Georges University Medical Center, Achraﬁeh, St Georges Street, Beirut, Lebanon



A R T I C L E I N F O



A B S T R A C T



Keywords:

Hip

Arthroscopy

AIIS



Introduction



FAI (Femoroacetabular Impingement) is an uncommon yet reported pathology of the hip joint,

especially in the young athletic population. If left untreated, it predisposes for premature os-

teoarthritis of the hip. FAI treatment modalities consists of either open or arthroscopic surgery,

the latter becoming the most adapted modality. We present a case of a young male athlete found

to have FAI, treated arthroscopically. His post operative follow up was complicated by anterior

inferior iliac spine avulsion fracture due to post op protocol non compliance which was treated

with ORIF, with satisfactory non symptomatic outcome.



Femoroacetabular impingement (FAI) is a cause of chondral lesions, labral tears and hip pain among young adults [1] and in

particular among athletes [2]. It is also a cause of osteoarthritis of the hips [3]. This condition presents a major cause of degenerative

hip outcome [4]. Previously, the standard treatments of FAI was surgical hip dislocation and open osteochondroplasty [5]. Currently,

arthroscopic repair has become the standard in such cases [6]. The arthroscopic technique follows the same precautions and steps as

an open surgical procedure [6]. As any other surgical procedure, the arthroscopic technique presents many challenges to the surgeon

and is prone to post-operative complications.



This report discusses the case of a 21-year-old male patient who was found to have an anterior inferior iliac spine avulsion fracture

11 months post hip arthroscopy for femoroacetabular impingement. According to a review of literature on hip arthroscopy com-

plications, few similar cases were reported [7].



Case report

