9 50
A successful oﬀ-pump cardiac repair following blunt cardiac

rupture – A case report

Awaneesh Katiyar⁎, Ajay Kumar, Neeraj Kumar, Ruby Kataria, Bhaskar Sarkar



Department of Trauma Surgery and Critical Care, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Rishikesh, India



A R T I C L E I N F O



A B S T R A C T



Keywords:

Cardiac rupture

Emergency thoracotomy

Cardiac repair

Atrial rupture



Background



A 25-year-old male truck driver presented to Emergency Department following unrestrained

heavy motor vehicle crash (MVC), when the high-speed truck collided to a wall. He sustained

blunt chest trauma from steering wheel and open fracture of right tibia with compartment

syndrome. On primary survey, patient was in shock with patent airway. Focused assessment

sonography for trauma (FAST) suggested cardiac tamponade for which ultrasound-guided peri-

cardial catheter was placed. After resuscitation patient was taken to the operation theatre. Clam-

shell thoracotomy revealed rents in left atrial appendages which were repaired. Fasciotomy of leg

was performed and external ﬁxator was applied for open tibia fracture. The patient developed

surgical site infection that was treated with local antibiotic and regular dressings. After two

weeks, fasciotomy wound was closed with split-skin grafting. At nine-month follow-up, patient

was able to resume his occupation as a heavy motor vehicle driver.



Historically survival rate is abysmal in cardiac rupture victims as most of them die during transport or at the scene [1,2]. Post-

operative, in-hospital mortality remains high due to pneumonia and sepsis, associated poly-trauma further worsens the prognosis

[2,3]. Rehn reported the ﬁrst successful cardiac repair in 1897 for penetrating cardiac injury, and Desforges and associates in 1955

reported similar technique for non-penetrating cardiac rupture. As per a review of 4169 victims of road traﬃc injuries between 1972

and 1985, chest trauma was the leading cause of death in 1121 patients. 75 out of 1121 patients were found to have a cardiac rupture

in the post-mortem report [4]. Frontal collisions like a crushing force against the steering wheel appear to be the leading cause of

cardiac rupture [4,5]. Besides blunt cardiac rupture has high mortality with a variable presentation in the emergency department,

thus making diagnosis of this entity more arduous [5]. Ours is a case of blunt cardiac rupture with open tibia fracture and com-

partment syndrome of leg, which was successfully managed by the trauma team.



Case presentation

