Trauma Case Reports 10 (2017) 12–15

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Trauma Case Reports

j o ur n a l h o m e p a g e : w ww . e l s e v i e r . c om / l o c a t e / t c r

Case Report
Gastric perforation following blunt abdominal trauma
M.R. Aboobakar, J.P. Singh, K. Maharaj, S. Mewa Kinoo ⁎, B. Singh

Department of Surgery and King Edward VIII Hospital, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban, South Africa

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Accepted 16 July 2017
Available online 26 July 2017

Keywords:
Blunt abdominal trauma
Gastric perforation
Hollow viscus injury
Stomach injury

Introduction

Gastric perforations following blunt abdominal trauma are rare, accounting for b2% of all blunt
abdominal injuries. Isolated blunt gastric ruptures are uncommon. They are usually associated
with other solid visceral injuries. Injuries to the stomach are associated with the highest
mortality of all hollow viscus injuries. Severity of the injury, timing of presentation and presen-
tation following the last meal as well as concomitant injuries are important prognostic factors.
Imaging modalities may be unreliable in making a diagnosis and thus clinical vigilance is
mandatory. We present a patient with gastric perforation following blunt abdominal trauma
and review the literature.
© 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Blunt abdominal trauma (BAT) following assaults, motor vehicle accidents and falls not uncommonly results in solid organ
(liver, spleen and kidney), diaphragmatic, pancreatic and retroperitoneal injury. Hollow viscera injuries to duodenum, jejunum,
urinary bladder and the colo-rectum are also not uncommon with an incidence that varies between 4 to 15% [1,2]. However,
by contrast, gastric perforations following BAT have an incidence of between 0.02 to 1.7%. A multicentre retrospective analysis
of blunt gastric injuries from four trauma centres in Brazil over a 14 year period yielded only 33 cases of gastric perforation
[3]. The rarity of gastric perforation developing following BAT in civilian practice together with the inconsistent diagnostic yield
from standard investigations has led to this condition being invariably recognised at laparotomy. In this case report we describe
an anterior gastric perforation following BAT due a motor vehicle accident.

Case report

A 29 years old male patient presented with severe abdominal pain and distention as a result of blunt abdominal trauma
sustained in a motor vehicle accident 2 h previously. At presentation, the patient was fully conscious, normotensive with a
pulse rate of 112/min. The haemoglobin was 13.6 g/dL. Multiple bruises and abrasions were evident over the anterior chest
and epigastrium. The abdomen was distended and peritonitic. The patient was also tender over the left lower anterior chest
wall; air entry was normal. Radiological investigations revealed a pneumoperitoneum and fractures involving ribs 10, 11 and
12 along the left anterior chest wall.

⁎ Corresponding author at: Department of Surgery, Nelson R Mandela School of Medicine, University of KwaZulu-Natal, 719 Umbilo Road, Congella 4013, Durban,

South Africa.

E-mail address: kinoo@ukzn.ac.za (S. Mewa Kinoo).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tcr.2017.07.001
2352-6440/© 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

M.R. Aboobakar et al. / Trauma Case Reports 10 (2017) 12–15

13

Fig. 1. Full thickness perforation along the anterior gastric wall measuring 5 cm extending proximally from the juxta-pylorus along the longitudinal gastric axis.

At laparotomy serosanguinous ﬂuid with undigested food particles was noted. A full thickness anterior gastric perforation
measuring 5 cm extended proximally from the pylorus along the longitudinal gastric axis (Fig. 1). This was classiﬁed as a
Grade II gastric injury (Table 1) [4].

Haematomas were noted over the transverse colon, jejunum and ileum and were managed conservatively. The gastric perfo-
ration was repaired in a standard fashion. The patient made an unremarkable and was discharged on the 7th post-operative day.

Table 1
Grading of gastric injuries [4].

Grade I

Grade II

Grade III

Grade IV
Grade V

Grading of gastric injuries

Intramural hematoma b 3 cm
Partial thickness laceration
Laceration:

Laceration:

Vascular:
Vascular:

b2 cm in GE junction/pylorus
b5 cm in proximal one-third
b10 cm in distal two-third
N2 cm in GE junction/pylorus
≥5 cm in proximal one-third
≥10 cm in distal two-third
Tissue loss/devascularisation ≤ two-third stomach
Tissue loss/devascularisation ≥ two-third stomach

14

Discussion

M.R. Aboobakar et al. / Trauma Case Reports 10 (2017) 12–15

The infrequency of gastric perforation following BAT is due to several factors that include the protective anatomy afforded by

the thoracic cage, the relative mobility of the stomach and gastric mural thickness [5].
Classically, gastric perforations due to BAT have been attributed to 3 mechanisms:

1) External compression resulting in an acute and intense rise of intra-abdominal pressure. This mechanism applies in particular
to a distended stomach with a consequent massive increase of intra gastric pressure. This mechanism may explain the devel-
opment of gastric perforation following the Heimlich manoeuvre.

2) Rapid deceleration causes differential movement among adjacent structures resulting in shear forces causing hollow, solid, vis-

ceral organs and vascular pedicles to tear, especially at relatively ﬁxed points of attachment.

3) Crushed intra-abdominal contents between the anterior abdominal wall and the vertebral column or posterior thoracic cage.

Gastric perforations due to BAT may develop in any location of the stomach. The most common location for gastric perforation
is the anterior wall (40%) followed by the greater curvature (23%), lesser curvature (15%) and posterior wall (15%). Such
perforations are invariably solitary; to date only 3 cases of a double gastric perforation following BAT have been described
(refer Table 2) [6].

Gastric perforations following BAT are usually associated with other intra- and extra-abdominal injuries; isolated blunt gastric
ruptures are uncommon. The most common associated injury is to the spleen, followed by thoracic injury [5,6]. The successful
management of gastric perforations due to BAT is contingent on an accurate clinical evaluation. Injuries to the stomach are asso-
ciated with the highest mortality of all hollow viscus injuries [7]. Morbidity and mortality increases parallel with time to operative
intervention (intervention within 8 h is associated with a 2% mortality, intervention within 8 to 16 h with a 9% mortality, inter-
vention within 16 to 25 h, a 17% mortality and intervention after 24 h over 30% mortality) [6]. The overall reported mortality
ranges from 0–66% [5,6,8].

The majority of complications are septic in nature with the reported incidence of intra-abdominal abscesses being up to 24%
[9]. In contrast to the fasted patient with a low gastric pH and bacterial load, the fed patient has a higher gastric pH that predis-
poses to a greater bacterial load with potential to predispose to much contamination and infective complications. In the instance
of unequivocal peritonitis prompt laparotomy will afford early diagnosis and appropriate treatment. However, the physical exam-
ination may be misleading when the patient is intoxicated or has associated injuries (head injury, spinal cord injury, thoracic or
long bone trauma) [10].

Although shock on presentation has been reported as a fairly common occurrence, it was reported in b20% of cases [3]. Vassey
et al. have suggested that aspiration of dark coloured ﬂuid on peritoneal lavage or paracentesis is probably the best pre-operative
diagnosis of gastric perforation [11]. Serum amylase has been suggested as a biochemical marker to diagnose upper gastrointes-
tinal rupture [12]; the unpredictability of this test makes this an unreliable diagnostic marker. Plain abdominal radiographs may
show pneumoperitoneum, retroperitoneal air or the obliteration of psoas muscle shadow, which though non-speciﬁc, will prompt
surgical intervention.

When there is a diagnostic dilemma, recourse to ultrasonography and computed tomography is advised. Ultrasonography has
value in identifying intra-abdominal ﬂuid which, in the presence of haemodynamic instability, strongly suggests free blood and an
indication for laparotomy. The failure to reliably distinguish hollow visceral injury from solid visceral injury is vital and compro-
mises the decision to undertake laparotomy, particularly in haemodynamic patients. Presently, helical (spiral) computed tomog-
raphy (CT) is advocated when there is diagnostic doubt in the setting of haemodynamic stability. The alarm features on CT scan
which prompt further intervention (diagnostic peritoneal lavage if single abnormality, laparotomy if several abnormalities) in-
clude unexplained intraperitoneal ﬂuid, pneumoperitoneum, bowel wall thickening, mesenteric fat stranding, mesenteric
haematoma, extravasation of bowel contents and free blood [9]. Notwithstanding this, clinical vigilance is mandatory as a negative
CT scan may miss a bowel perforation in 13% of cases [13].

Table 2
Summary of the features of gastric injury due to blunt trauma.

Mechanisms of injury

Location of injury

Most common associated injury
Mortality
Complications
Diagnosis

Management

Increase in intra gastric pressure
Deceleration shear force tears
Crush between anterior abdominal wall and vertebra
Anterior wall (40%)
Greater curve (23%)
Lesser curve (15%)
Posterior wall (15%)
Spleen
Increases with time to operative intervention
Abdominal abscess (24%) [more common in post-prandial trauma]
Abdominal radiograph: pneumoperitoneum
Peritoneal paracentesis: dark coloured ﬂuid
Computed tomography: free ﬂuid with thickened wall and mesenteric fat standing
According to grade (see Table 1)

M.R. Aboobakar et al. / Trauma Case Reports 10 (2017) 12–15

15

Fig. 2. Suggested management of blunt gastric injury.

The surgical management of gastric injury is largely dictated by the grade of injury [which reﬂects the nature (haematoma vs
laceration), extent and location of the injury – Table 1] as well as by the presence of associated injuries. A management algorithm
has been suggested (Fig. 2) and a summary of the literature is provided in Table 2.

At laparotomy it is mandatory to exclude a separate gastric laceration (for example, along the posterior gastric wall). Grades 1
to 3 gastric injuries (the majority of gastric injuries) are amenable to primary repair; a 2 layer closure is advocated to effect
haemostasis. Grade 4 (tissue loss with devascularisation affecting b50% of stomach) and Grade 5 (tissue loss with
devascularisation affecting N50% of stomach) gastric injuries are uncommon, associated with other organ and major vascular in-
juries; affected patients rarely reach hospital alive.

In the light of the extent of the injuries, primary repair will not be feasible in patients with Grades 4 and 5 gastric injuries.
Depending on the location of the tissue loss (proximal vs distal stomach) and extent of devascularisation, sub-total or rarely
total gastrectomy may have to be undertaken. The options to restore gastrointestinal continuity will be inﬂuenced by the presence
of associated injuries (to duodenum, bile duct and pancreas) and include a gastro-duodenostomy, gastro-jejunostomy or a Roux-
en-Y reconstruction.

Conclusion

Severity of the injury, timing of presentation and presentation following the last meal as well as concomitant injuries are im-
portant prognostic factors. Prompt diagnosis and timely intervention greatly limits mortality and morbidity associated with blunt
gastric injuries. Majority of which are septic in nature.

References

[1] J.L. Isenhour, J. Marx, Advances in abdominal trauma, Emerg. Med. Clin. North Am. 25 (2007) 713.
[2] D.S. Talton, M.H. Craig, C.A. Hauser, et al., Major gastroenteric injuries from blunt trauma, Am. Surg. 61 (1) (1995) 69–73.
[3] V. Bruscagin, R. Coimbra, S. Rasslan, W.L. Abrantes, H.P. Souzac, N. Gasparini, et al., Blunt gastric injury. A multicentre experience, Inj. Int. J. Care Injured 32 (2001)

761–764.

[4] E.E. Moore, G.J. Jurkovich, M.M. Knudson, et al., Organ injury scaling VI: extrahepatic biliary, oesophagus, stomach, vulva, vagina, uterus (non-pregnant), uterus

(pregnant), fallopian tube, and ovary, J. Trauma 39 (1995) 1069–1070.

[5] R.D. Yajko, F. Seydel, C. Trimble, Rupture of the stomach from blunt abdominal trauma, J. Trauma 15 (3) (1975) 177–183.
[6] R. Maheshwari, A. Sayana, P. Mahesh, Gastric rupture following blunt trauma abdomen: a case report, Indian J. Clin. Pract. 23 (12) (2013) 859–860.
[7] P.K. Hota, M. Babu, G. Satyam, Ch. Praveen, Traumatic gastric rupture following blunt trauma abdomen: a case series, Bali Med. J. 3 (1) (2014) 49–52.
[8] P.A. Courcy, C. Soderstrom, S. Brotman, Gastric rupture from blunt trauma. A plea for minimal diagnostics and early surgery, Am. Surg. 50 (8) (1984) 424–427.
[9] M.A. Croce, T.C. Fabian, Jh. Patton Jr., et al., Impact of stomach and colon injuries on intra-abdominal abscess and the synergistic effect of haemorrhage and as-

sociated injury, J. Trauma 45 (1998) 649.

[10] J.A. Weinberg, C. Timothy, T.C. Fabian, Injuries to the stomach, small bowel, colon and rectum, Trauma Therm. Inj. 7 (2005) 1–8.
[11] L.E. Vassey, R.L. Klecker, E. Koch, et al., Traumatic gastric perforation in children from blunt trauma, J. Trauma 15 (3) (1975) 184–186.
[12] J.A. Asensio, D. Demetriades, D.E. Hanpeter, E. Gambaro, S. Chahwan, Management of pancreatic injuries, Curr. Probl. Surg. 36 (5) (1999) 325–419.
[13] S.M. Fakhry, D.D. Watts, F.A. Luchette, EAST Multi-Institutional Hollow Viscus Injury Research Group, Current diagnostic approaches lack sensitivity in the diag-
nosis of perforated blunt small bowel injury: analysis from 275,557 trauma admissions from the EAST multi-institutional HVI trial, J. Trauma 54 (2) (2003)
295–306.

