Trauma Case Reports 25 (2020) 100267

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Trauma Case Reports

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/tcr

Case Report
High-voltage electrocution-induced pulmonary injury and
cerebellar hemorrhage with fractures in atlas
Lutfun Nahar Nizhua, Md Jahidul Hasanb,⁎, Raihan Rabbanic

a ICU, Medical Services, Square Hospitals Ltd., Dhaka, Bangladesh
b Clinical Pharmacy Services, Department of Pharmacy, Square Hospitals Ltd., Dhaka, Bangladesh
c Internal Medicine and ICU, Medical Services, Square Hospitals Ltd., Dhaka, Bangladesh

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
High-voltage
Electrocution
Cerebellar hemorrhage
Pulmonary injury

Background: Electrocution is a common cause of mild to severe multisystem injuries leading to
high rate of mortality and morbidity. Low to high-voltage injury may be clinically manifested
from a simple unpleasant sensation to multiple soft tissue injury which may cause instant death.
The severity of injury depends on intensity of the electrical current, voltage of the source, re-
sistance in the victims' body and the duration of the contact.
Case presentation: A 20-year-old young male experienced with an accidental high-voltage elec-
trocution injury from a blasted electrical transformer while passing across the road. He lost his
consciousness and immediately hospitalized. Bilateral pulmonary inﬁltrates and right cerebellar
hemorrhage with fractures in anterior and posterior arch of the ﬁrst cervical vertebrae (C1) were
diagnosed, and there was no history of electrical burn. He stayed in hospital for three days and
completely treated with initial oxygen supplementation and immobilization of his head and neck
with a Philadelphia collar for 6 weeks. Electrocution is a serious public health concern and re-
ported worldwide with few fatal ending. Accidental high-voltage electrocution injury is a serious
type of unfortunate accidental injuries which in most of times, ends with immediate or delayed
sequelae or even death. In this case, the victim with high-voltage-associated electrical injuries in
his lungs and brain was completely recovered because of early hospitalization.
Conclusions: Electrocution injury is an accidental event with high mortality and morbidity rate.
Mild to severe electrical current-induced injuries including burn can be treated successfully in
most of the cases, but early hospitalization is highly required.

Background

Electrocution is a mechanical trauma and can be deﬁned as death or severe one or more injuries a living organ from an accidental
contact with a low to high-voltage electrical source. An accidental electrocution injury may be occurred either with high-voltage
(> 1000 V) or with low-voltage (< 1000 V). High-voltage injury is relatively associated with high rate of mortality and morbidity
[1]. Electocution injury may results in mild to severe skin burn, musculoskeletal injury, myoglobinuria, acute renal failure, neu-
ropsychiatric symptoms and ventricular ﬁbrillation [2]. Here, we had a case of high-voltage-associated lung injury and right cere-
bellar hemorrhage with multiple fractures in the arch of the atlas, and complete recovery in that patient attained without any
permanent damage.

⁎ Corresponding author at: Clinical Pharmacy Services, Department of Pharmacy, Square Hospitals Ltd., 18/F Bir Uttam Qazi Nuruzzaman Sarak,

West Panthapath, Dhaka 1205, Bangladesh.

E-mail addresses: oporajita84@gmail.com (L.N. Nizhu), jahidul@squarehospital.com (M.J. Hasan), drraihan@squarehospital.com (R. Rabbani).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcr.2019.100267
Accepted 6 November 2019
Available online 27 November 2019
2352-6440/ © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).

L.N. Nizhu, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 25 (2020) 100267

Case presentation

Fig. 1. First vertebral fracture.

A 20-year-old male came to emergency room of our hospital with a history of an accidental multiorgan electrocution injury while
passing across the road. According to the statements of eyewitness, accidentally he was contacted with a blasted high-voltage
electrical transformer while he was passing across the road, lost his consciousness, felt on ground and immediately, immediately
admitted in hospital. After shifting to ICU, his consciousness returned to normal level, pulse rate was 88 beats/min, blood pressure
was 90/60 mmHg, temperature was 99 °F, Glasgow coma scale (GCS) score was E3 V5 M6 and SpO2 was 94% with 2 L of supplemental
oxygen. There was no sign of burn. Entry and exit point of electrocution in the body was absent. He complained his neck pain and his
neck movement was restricted in all directions. No focal neurological deﬁcit was found. Computed tomography (CT) scan of cervical
vertebrae revealed two fractures (one fracture in the anterior arch and another fracture in the posterior arch) in the arches of atlas
also called, ﬁrst cervical vertebrae (C1) (Fig. 1). CT scan of brain showed right cerebellar hemorrhage (Fig. 2). Immobilization of neck
was done with Philadelphia collar. CT scan of chest revealed focal consolidation with pulmonary inﬁltrates in both lungs (Fig. 3). His
troponin I was 1.12 ng/mL and echo cardiogram showed no regional wall motion abnormality and ejection fraction was 55%. After
three days of treatment in ICU, his physical conditions improved and discharged to home with Philadelphia collar, and after 6 weeks,

Fig. 2. Right cerebellar hemorrhage.

2

L.N. Nizhu, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 25 (2020) 100267

Fig. 3. Chest CT scan demonstrates bilateral pulmonary inﬁltrates.

his fractures in C1 were completely healed.

Discussion and conclusions

Electrocution is the electric shock-mediated mild to severe injuries in a living organ and is associated with high rate of mortality
and morbidity [1]. The severity of injury depends on intensity of the electrical current determined by the voltage of the source and
the resistance in the victim's body; pathway it follows through the victim's body; and duration of the contact with the source of the
current [2]. Accidental high-voltage-associated electrocution injuries may result in immediate death mostly due to high-voltage
electric shock-induced ventricular ﬁbrillation or acute respiratory arrest as a result of paralysis of the central respiratory control
center or fulminant respiratory muscles paralysis [1]. Severe high-voltage-associated electrical injuries include ﬁrst to third-degree
burns, myocardial dysfunctions, brain injury and permanent loss of organ function [1,2]. Electrical energy-induced direct tissue
damage, massive tissue destruction or necrosis due to the conversion of electrical energy into thermal energy and mechanical injury
as a result of sudden falls or massive muscle contraction- are the basic mechanisms behind the electrocution injuries [2]. In our case,
the patient developed focal consolidation in both lungs and two fractures in the arches of C1 vertebrae.

High-voltage electric current-induced bleeding in left parietal area of the cerebrum, acute cardiogenic pulmonary edema, lung
tissue injury and burn [1,3–6]. In our case, the patient had bleeding into right cerebellum. Two cases of electrical workers reported
focal consolidation with lung infarction due to high-voltage electric current (≥1000 V) and underwent surgical resection [4,5]. Focal
lung injury was reported in an electrical worker after a low-voltage shock (380 V) complicated by respiratory arrest and subsequent
cerebral edema [6]. Multiple previous cases reported electrical burn injury in diﬀerent parts of the victims caused by direct contact to
high-voltage electric current without having any fracture in cervical vertebrae [1,6,7]. In our patient, there was no sign of electrical
burn injury found in his body during hospital admission but, couple of fractures in C1 vertebrae were clearly detected which is very
rare. Additionally, the patient had focal consolidation in both lungs but, comparatively larger consolidated area was found in the left
lung.

Both joule heating and irreversible denaturation of cellular macromolecules are considered as the primary mechanisms of
electrical current-induced internal injuries, and force of current causes electroporation throughout the cell that results in dis-
orientation of polar amino acids of the channel proteins which makes the channel proteins dysfunctional as a result of their con-
formational changes. These cellular mechanisms ﬁnally lead to tissue necrosis and injury [8]. The severity of injury is associated with
the characteristics of electric current including its magnitude, type, direction, contact interval, resistance of the entrance point and
personal susceptibility [5,6,8]. High-voltage-associated severe injuries in most the cases persisted with permanent damage or even
ended in death [3,5]. Immediate hospitalization and treatment initiation after an electrocution injury may reduce the rate of mor-
tality in the victims [6]. In our case, the victim was hospitalized immediately after the accident and cured completely within couple of
weeks.

High-voltage electrocution injury is a serious type of accidents with potential risk of multi organ damage and death. Early

diagnosis of the related injuries and immediate management enhances the expectancy of complete recovery.

Funding statement

None of the authors received any speciﬁc funding for this work.

Consent for publication

The patient and his relatives gave written and verbal consent to submission of this case report for publication. Written consent can

be presented on request.

3

L.N. Nizhu, et al.

Declaration of competing interest

None of the authors state any conﬂicts of interest.

References

Trauma Case Reports 25 (2020) 100267

[1] G.A. Axayacalt, C.E. Alejandro, R.A. Marcos, R.F. Inocencio, H.G. Alfredo, Brain hemorrhage after electrical burn injury: case report and probable mechanism,

Surg. Neurol. Int. 7 (Suppl. 28) (2016) S759–S762.

[2] R. Teodoreanu, S.A. Popescu, I. Lascar, Electrical injuries. Biological values measurements as a prediction factor of local evolution in electrocutions lesions, J Med

Life 7 (2) (2014) 226–236.

659–663.

[3] R.M. Schein, D.H. Kett, E.J. De Marchena, C.L. Sprung, Pulmonary edema associated with electrical injury, Chest 97 (5) (1990) 1248–1250.
[4] M.A. Cooper, Electrical and lightning injuries, Emerg. Med. Clin. North Am. 2 (3) (1984) 489–501.
[5] M.J. Masanès, E. Gourbière, J. Prudent, N. Lioret, M. Febvre, S. Prévot, B. Lebeau, A high voltage electrical burn of lung parenchyma, Burns 26 (7) (2000)

[6] A.R. Schleich, H. Schweiger, A. Becsey, C.W. Cruse, Survival after severe intrathoracic electrical injury, Burns 36 (5) (2010) e61–e64.
[7] T.J. Huei, S.J. Mohd Yussof, H.T.C. Lip, I. Salina, Case report of a high voltage electrical injury and review of the indications for early fasciotomy in limb salvage of

an electrically injured limb, Ann Burns Fire Disasters 30 (2) (2017) 150–153.

[8] H. Karamanli, R. Akgedik, Lung damage due to low-voltage electrical injury, Acta Clin. Belg. 72 (5) (2017) 349–351.

4

