Trauma Case Reports 7 (2017) 3–6

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Trauma Case Reports

j o ur n a l h o m e p a g e : w ww . e l s e v i e r . c om / l o c a t e / t c r

Case Report
Open liver trauma causing hepatico caval ﬁstula successfully treated
by embolization
Zeineb Mzoughi a,b,⁎, Achref Djebbi a,b, Rached Bayar a,b, Leila Ben Frahat a,b,c,
Lassaad Gharbi a,b, Mohamed Taher Khalfallah a,b
a Tunis Manar University, Faculty of Medicine of Tunis, 1007 Tunis, Tunisia
b General Surgery Department, Mongi Slim Hospital, Sidi Daoued, La Marsa, Tunisia
c Radiology Department, Mongi Slim Hospital, Sidi Daoued, La Marsa, Tunisia

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Accepted 2 January 2017
Available online 18 January 2017

Keywords:
Fistula
Trauma
Arteriovenous
Embolization

Introduction

Introduction: Traumatic arteriovenous ﬁstula results from a breach of vascular integrity be-
tween a vein and an adjacent artery. Hepato caval ﬁstula is a rare entity. Open surgical ap-
proaches have increasingly given way to radiological embolization techniques in the
treatment of these arteriovenous ﬁstulae, especially in intrahepatic locations.
Case report: We report the case of a patient diagnosed with a ﬁstula, from the right branch of
the liver artery to the right hepatic vein, developed following an open liver trauma. Successful
embolization through the transarterial route was achieved with simple outcomes.
Conclusion: The interventional radiology for endovascular management has revolutionized the
treatment of hepatic liver traumas. The conservative treatment is henceforth the common ap-
proach even if hepatic artery or hepatic veins are involved in case of arteriovenous ﬁstula.

© 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the
CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Hepatic arteriovenous ﬁstulae (AVF) are described as an abnormal communication between the hepatic artery and portal or
hepatic vein. Congenital hepatic AVF are rare. Acquired ones are more common. They can occur secondary to iatrogenic causes,
like percutaneous invasive vascular interventions such as cardiac catheterization, central venous catheterization or even percuta-
neous biopsies [1,2]. AVF occurs also following mechanical insult like blunt or penetrating trauma. Hepato-caval arteriovenous ﬁs-
tula is rarely observed (few cases are reported in literature). We herein report a case of hepato-caval ﬁstula following a stab
wound of the liver. We discuss the diagnostic approach and the therapeutic modalities taken at this situation.

Observation

A 54 years old patient, with no signiﬁcant pathological history, was admitted to the digestive and general surgery department
for right thoraco-abdominal stab wound. At physical examination, there was a 1 cm linear sub-xiphoid wound, with clear shores,
bleeding, with a subcutaneous hematoma. Blood pressure was 130/80 mm Hg, the heart rate measured to be 82 bpm and blood

⁎ Corresponding author at: General and Digestive Surgery Department, CHU Mongi Slim Sidi Daoued, Tunis, Tunisia

E-mail address: mzeineb@yahoo.com (Z. Mzoughi).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tcr.2017.01.002
2352-6440/© 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

4

Z. Mzoughi et al. / Trauma Case Reports 7 (2017) 3–6

Fig. 1. Abdominal CT scan showing hepatic laceration (arrow) of segments IV, V and VIII without extravasation of contrast medium.

Fig. 2. Hepatic CT angiography showing opaciﬁcation of the right hepatic vein (arrow) and the retrocaval vena cava in the early arterial phase.

Fig. 3. Vascular reconstruction from the CT angio-scan demonstrating a communication between the right branch of the hepatic artery (arrow) and the right
hepatic vein (star).

Z. Mzoughi et al. / Trauma Case Reports 7 (2017) 3–6

5

Fig. 4. Arteriography showing the arteriovenous ﬁstula before and after embolization.

oxygen saturation was of 98%. The abdomen was checked to be soft with a sensitivity of the right hypochondrium. Blood count
showed a haemoglobin at 12.3 g/dL. A chest X-ray showed no rind or pleural effusion. Then an abdominal CT scan was performed,
which demonstrated a deep hepatic laceration of segments IV, V and VIII of the liver without extravasation of the contrast medi-
um (Fig. 1). There were no other associated lesions.

Owing to the hemodynamic stability and the absence of peritoneal signs, a non-operative treatment was advised. Clinical sta-

tus of the patient remained stable. Haemoglobin levels remained correct.

On day 12 post traumatic, the patient complained of pain of the right hypochondrium with fever at 38.5 °C. There was
hyperleukocytosis at 23,000 cell/mm3. Hepatic CT angiography showed a pseudo aneurysm of the right hepatic artery with an
opaciﬁcation of the right hepatic vein in the early arterial phase (Fig. 2).

Vascular reconstruction from the CT angio-scan showed a communication between the right branch of the hepatic artery and

the right hepatic vein (Fig. 3).

The treatment consisted of a selective radiological embolization of the branch of the right hepatic artery, site of the ﬁstula. The
arteriography showed a complete disappearance of the extravasation of contrast media after embolization and coils in place (Fig. 4).
A checkup performed with an angioscanner at day 3 post-embolization, showed the absence of opaciﬁcation of the right he-

patic vein during the arterial phase. The patient had no complains with a decline of 3 months.

Discussion

An arteriovenous ﬁstula (AVF) is an abnormal communication between an artery and an adjacent vein. This communication

can be congenital but it is frequently acquired from an iatrogenic or traumatic aetiology.

Intrahepatic arteriovenous ﬁstulae are usually due to secondary rupture of an aneurysm of the hepatic artery into a vein. This
usually happens in the portal vein or its branches. The hepatocaval post traumatic ﬁstula has rarely been described in the litera-
ture. The symptoms of these ﬁstulae depend on their site and size. The more central and wider the ﬁstula is, the more symptom-
atic it could be [1]. These symptoms vary from the simple abdominal pain to the array of congestive heart failure at its severe
degree. Indeed, a hepatocaval ﬁstula with a high ﬂow generates a volume overload, of the right heart. Inevitably, this leads to
a right heart failure then an overall heart failure [3]. Treatment is warranted as an emergency management or in the development
of portal hypertension or heart failure, in chronic cases.

Doppler ultrasound imaging, CT angioscan and magnetic resonance angiography are appropriate for the diagnostics of an ar-

teriovenous ﬁstula. However an arteriography remains mandatory to show its exact anatomical conﬁguration [4,5].

In such cases, three treatment options are possible: monitoring, surgery and radiological embolization [6]. Monitoring is rec-
ommended for small central asymptomatic ﬁstulae. Endovascular management is an alternative choice of treatment [4]. Surgery
is required when the interventional radiology fails or in case of further associated complications, including hemorrhagic events.

Conclusion

The interventional radiology for endovascular management has revolutionized the treatment of hepatic liver traumas. The con-
servative treatment is henceforth the common approach even if hepatic artery or hepatic veins are involved in case of arteriove-
nous ﬁstula.

References

[1] J.A. Sexton, J.J. Ricotta, Endovascular approaches to arteriovenous fistula, Adv. Surg. 45 (1) (2011) 83–100.
[2] S.B. Gonzalez, J.C. Busquets, R.G. Figueiras, et al., Imaging arteriovenous fistulas, Am. J. Roentgenol. 193 (2009) 1425–1433.
[3] J.P. Kévorkian, P.L. Michel, J.M. Faintuch, et al., Congestive cardiac failure secondary to hepatico-portal arteriovenous fistula. Apropos of a case and review of the

literature, Arch. Mal. Coeur Vaiss. 86 (3) (1993) 371–375.

6

Z. Mzoughi et al. / Trauma Case Reports 7 (2017) 3–6

[4] K. Ibn Majdoub Hassani, R. Mohsine, A. Belkouchi, Y. Bensaid, Post-traumatic arteriovenous fistula of the hepatic pedicle, J. Visc. Surg. 147 (2010) 333–336.
[5] R.H. Wachsberg, P. Bahrami, T. Constantine, B. Allison, Hepatofugal flow in the portal venous system: pathophysiology imaging findings, and diagnostic pitfalls,

Radiographics 22 (2002) 123–140.

[6] V.N. Tsygankov, A.M. Frantsevich, A.B. Varava, V.N. Dan, N.R. Chernaya, Endovascular treatment of post-traumatic arteriovenous fistulae, Khirurgiia (Mosk) 7

(2015) 34–40.

