Trauma Case Reports 25 (2020) 100282

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Trauma Case Reports

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/tcr

Case Report
Isolated renal vein and inferior vena cava thrombus following blunt
trauma abdomen. A rare case scenario☆
Kalpesh Parmar⁎, Abhishek Thakur, Anuj Sharma, Santosh Kumar

Dept of Urology, PGIMER, Chandigarh, India

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Thrombus
Trauma
Anticoagulant
Inferior vena cava
Embolism

Introduction

Objective: Renal vein thrombosis in adults occurs as a result of various etiologies such as ne-
phrotic syndrome, renal cell cancer, hypercoagulable state and trauma. Renovascular injury
happens in 3% to 4% of patients with blunt abdominal trauma and usually occurs in association
with signiﬁcant injury to the abdominal viscera or skeleton.
Method: A 40-year-old female suﬀered from blunt abdominal trauma following a road traﬃc
accident while she was travelling as a pillion rider on a two-wheeler vehicle.
Result: The patient was diagnosed with left renal vein and inferior vena cava thrombus without
any associated renal parenchymal or injuries to other organs. She was managed conservatively
with anticoagulants and regular monitoring. Follow up imaging after 3 months showed complete
resolution of thrombus.
Conclusion: Traumatic renal vein or inferior vena cava injury usually occurs in combination with
renal arterial or parenchymal injury. Isolated major venous injury is rare.

Renal vein thrombosis is caused by nephrotic syndrome, retroperitoneal tumours with vein compression, hypercoagulable state,
trauma and malignancy. Traumatic venous thrombosis is commonly associated with renal artery and major parenchymal injury.
Isolated renal vein thrombosis following trauma is rare. Contrast enhanced computed tomography imaging conﬁrms the diagnosis. If
patient is stable with no risk of thromboembolic episodes, conservative approach is preferred and anticoagulants initiated and closely
monitored. Herein, we present a case of road traﬃc accident with isolated renal vein and inferior vena cava (IVC) thrombosis. This is
probably the ﬁrst case in English literature reporting IVC and renal vein thrombus following blunt abdominal trauma.

Case presentation

A 40-year-old female was referred to our center with the history of a roadside accident while she was travelling as a pillion rider
on a two-wheeler vehicle hit by a car from behind. The rider fell sideways and sustained clean cut wounds over the forearm and left
knee. The pillion rider was accelerated in the front and hit by the two-wheeler handle in the abdomen. She complained of right upper
abdominal pain and few minor abrasions over the right lower limb. There was no complaint of vomiting, seizures, back pain or
haematuria. Her past medical history was insigniﬁcant. On examination, patient was alert and conscious; vitals were stable, physical
and systemic examinations were normal. Routine work including hemogram, renal function test and serum electrolytes were normal.

☆ Informed consent: Patient's informed consent was obtained regarding the use of personal data and images for the preparation of this manuscript.
⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: kalpesh010385@gmail.com (K. Parmar).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcr.2020.100282
Accepted 5 January 2020
Available online 09 January 2020
2352-6440/ © 2020 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).

K. Parmar, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 25 (2020) 100282

Fig. 1. CECT abdomen axial image depicting partial inferior vena cava thrombus and left renal vein thrombus. (Black transparent arrow).

Abdominal ultrasound showed mild free ﬂuid in pelvis. X ray chest and right lower limb were grossly normal. Contrast enhanced CT
(Computed tomography) abdomen revealed partial thrombus of left renal vein and infra hepatic inferior vena cava thrombus (Fig. 1).
There were no collateral vessels in the adjacent surrounding area suggesting it as an acute event. The renal artery was normal with no
evidence of renal parenchymal injury. Rest of the solid organs were grossly normal. In view of isolated venous involvement, the
conservative approach was trailed. Patient was advised strict bed rest and vitals were monitored at frequent intervals. Baseline
prothrombin time (PT) and international normalized ratio (INR) were done and the injection Enoxaparin 0.75 mg/kg twice a day
started after consultation with haematology expert. PT and INR were monitored daily and 2 mg warfarin tablet started on day 4,
overlapping with enoxaparin keeping therapeutic range of INR between 2 and 3. Patient was discharged on day 8 and advised to
follow up at regular intervals with INR. A repeat contrast CT after 3 months showed complete resolution of thrombus (Figs. 2, 3).
Haematology review was taken and anticoagulants were continued for another 3 months and tapered gradually. Currently, patient is
asymptomatic, 8 months follow up and planned for colour Doppler imaging of renal vessels.

Discussion

Renal vein thrombosis in adults occurs as a result of various aetiologies such as nephrotic syndrome, tumour thrombus and trauma
[1]. Renovascular injury is rare with blunt abdominal trauma. It usually has concomitant major organ or other skeletal injuries.
Traumatic renal vein thrombosis is commonly associated with renal arterial or parenchymal injury [2]. Previously only 2 cases with
isolated renal vein thrombosis were reported in English medical literature to the best of our knowledge. In both of these cases,
patients presented with haematuria and the thrombus was limited to renal vein [3,4].

The clinical proﬁle of patients with renal vein thrombosis due to any cause may vary from being asymptomatic to symptoms like
nausea or vomiting or speciﬁc symptoms such as haematuria or loin pain. One of the disastrous complications is pulmonary embolism
which may be the ﬁrst presenting sign of renal vein thrombosis [5]. Contrast enhanced CT is non-invasive, performed quickly and has
high diagnostic accuracy for diagnosis of major venous thrombosis [6,7]. Malignant thrombosis associated with renal cell cancer has
enhancement and features of wall inﬁltration. Bland thrombus seen following trauma appears as hypodense ﬁlling defect in lumen of

Fig. 2. Follow up CECT abdomen axial image at 3 months showing complete resolution of thrombus in inferior vena cava. (Black transparent arrow).

2

K. Parmar, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 25 (2020) 100282

Fig. 3. Follow up CECT abdomen axial image at 3 months showing complete resolution of thrombus in left renal vein. (White solid arrow).

the veins. Treatment aims towards salvage of renal function and prevention of complications. In stable patients, conservative therapy
is preferred. Regular monitoring of vitals and oral anticoagulant therapy for dissolution of thrombus is favoured option. Antic-
oagulation is started early to prevent propagation of thrombus and potential serious thromboembolism. Heparin is the initial an-
ticoagulant of choice. Recently, low molecular weight heparin such as enoxaparin has been used widely as it does not bind to plasma
proteins and has improved eﬃcacy over unfractionated heparin in preventing thromboembolism. Also, unfractionated heparin has
higher incidence of side eﬀects in patients with renal and liver failure [8]. Oral anticoagulants like warfarin are switched over
subsequently. Its unique metabolism, protein binding and excretion require careful monitoring and serial follow up. Warfarin should
always be overlapped for 3–5 days with heparin due to its late onset of action [8]. Thrombectomy or nephrectomy may be needed in
certain clinical scenarios [10,11].

In the present case, the patient had no haematuria. The reason for this unusual presentation may be a partially occluding
thrombus, thereby not leading to considerable intrarenal hypertension and consequential haematuria. This is the ﬁrst case to the best
of our knowledge with isolated renal vein and inferior vena cava thrombus in a patient with blunt trauma and without haematuria
that was successfully managed with anticoagulant therapy.

Conclusion

Isolated renal vein and inferior vena cava thrombus following blunt trauma is rare. Contrast enhanced computed tomography
imaging conﬁrms the diagnosis. Conservative approach favoured in stable patients. Anticoagulants strongly recommended for pre-
vention of thromboembolism. Thrombolytics or ﬁlter placement should be considered in acute settings.

Acknowledgements

We sincerely thank the patient for being cooperative during the hospital stay.

Funding

None.

Declaration of competing interest

None.

References

[1] S.J. Barbour, A. Greenwald, O. Djurdjev, et al., Disease-speciﬁc risk of venous thromboembolic events is increased in idiopathic glomerulonephritis, Kidney Int.

81 (2) (2012) 190–195.

[2] E. Kau, R. Patel, O. Shah, Isolated renal vein thrombosis after blunt trauma, Urology 64 (2004) 807.
[3] E. Kau, R. Patel, O. Shah, Isolated renal vein thrombosis after blunt trauma, Urology 64 (4) (2004) 807–808.
[4] G.Y. Berkovich, P. Ramchandani, D.L. Preate Jr.et al., Renal vein thrombosis after martial arts trauma, J. Trauma Acute Care Surg. 50 (1) (2001) 144–146.
[5] K. Mzayen, J. Al-Said, S. Nayak-Rao, et al., Unusual presentation of renal vein thrombosis with pulmonary artery embolism, Saudi J Kidney Dis Transpl 24 (3)

(2013) 566–570.

[6] A. Alvarez-Castells, C.C. Sebastia, G.S. Quiroga, Computerized tomography angiography of renal vessels, Arch. Esp. Urol. 54 (6) (2001) 603–615.
[7] M. Asghar, K. Ahmed, S.S. Shah, et al., Renal vein thrombosis, Eur. J. Vasc. Endovasc. Surg. 34 (2) (2007) 217–223.
[8] C.H. Wu, S.F. Ko, C.H. Lee, et al., Successful outpatient treatment of renal vein thrombosis by low-molecular weight heparins in 3 patients with nephrotic

3

K. Parmar, et al.

syndrome, Clin. Nephrol. 65 (6) (2006) 433–440.

Trauma Case Reports 25 (2020) 100282

[10] H.S. Kim, D.M. Fine, M.G. Atta, Catheter- directed thrombectomy and thrombolysis for acute renal vein thrombosis, J. Vasc. Interv. Radiol. 17 (5) (2006)

815–822.

[11] G.E. Mitroshin, A.V. Obraztsov, S.I. Apevalov, et al., A favourable outcome of surgical treatment of a patient with thrombosis of the renal vein and inferior vena

cava, Angiol Sosud Khir 11 (3) (2005) 124–126.

4

