Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100342

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Trauma Case Reports

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/tcr

Case Report
Anterior inferior iliac spine avulsion fracture post hip arthroscopy
for Femoroacetabular impingement☆,☆☆
Joseph Maalouly, Dany Aouad⁎, Rami Ayoubi, Nabil Dib, Mohammad Darwish,
Elias Saidy, Alexandre Nehme
Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Traumatology Saint Georges University Medical Center, Balamand University, P.O. Box 166378 Achraﬁeh, Beirut
1100 2807, Lebanon
St Georges University Medical Center, Achraﬁeh, St Georges Street, Beirut, Lebanon

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Hip
Arthroscopy
AIIS

Introduction

FAI (Femoroacetabular Impingement) is an uncommon yet reported pathology of the hip joint,
especially in the young athletic population. If left untreated, it predisposes for premature os-
teoarthritis of the hip. FAI treatment modalities consists of either open or arthroscopic surgery,
the latter becoming the most adapted modality. We present a case of a young male athlete found
to have FAI, treated arthroscopically. His post operative follow up was complicated by anterior
inferior iliac spine avulsion fracture due to post op protocol non compliance which was treated
with ORIF, with satisfactory non symptomatic outcome.

Femoroacetabular impingement (FAI) is a cause of chondral lesions, labral tears and hip pain among young adults [1] and in
particular among athletes [2]. It is also a cause of osteoarthritis of the hips [3]. This condition presents a major cause of degenerative
hip outcome [4]. Previously, the standard treatments of FAI was surgical hip dislocation and open osteochondroplasty [5]. Currently,
arthroscopic repair has become the standard in such cases [6]. The arthroscopic technique follows the same precautions and steps as
an open surgical procedure [6]. As any other surgical procedure, the arthroscopic technique presents many challenges to the surgeon
and is prone to post-operative complications.

This report discusses the case of a 21-year-old male patient who was found to have an anterior inferior iliac spine avulsion fracture
11 months post hip arthroscopy for femoroacetabular impingement. According to a review of literature on hip arthroscopy com-
plications, few similar cases were reported [7].

Case report

This is the case of a 21-year-old male patient who presented with right hip pain upon exercise. X-ray (Fig. 1A and B) and MRI
(Fig. 1C) revealed right hip mixed femoroacetabular impingement (Pincer and CAM lesions). He underwent right hip arthroscopy
using traction table for his FAI in 2015 with satisfying post-op results. Both CAM and pincer lesions were debrided using a burr.

☆ No funds were received in support of this study.
☆☆ The authors declare no conﬂict of interest regarding the publication of this article.
⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: Dany_aouad@hotmail.com (D. Aouad).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcr.2020.100342
Accepted 27 July 2020
Available online 29 July 2020
2352-6440/ © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).

J. Maalouly, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100342

Fig. 1. (A) Pelvis AP X-ray showing mixed femoroacetabular impingement (B) Lateral hip.
X-ray showing mixed femoroacetabular impingement (C) MRI T1 coronal cut showing right hip mixed femoroacetabular impingement.

Adequate resection was veriﬁed with ﬂuoroscopy, with the involved part of the labrum being stable, requiring no further ﬁxation.
At his 1-month follow-up, he had full range of motion and reported minimal pain. Patient started resuming his sports activities
progressively with no to minimal pain. His activities consisted mainly of soccer and running. On his 6 months follow-up, patient
presented with diﬀuse pain in his right groin area that intensiﬁes with any hip movement. He was advised to lower his exercising
intensity and stop forceful kicking sports. 11 months post-op, his right groin pain persisted and became prominent mostly with
hyperextension of his hip. He reports no history of trauma. X-ray (Fig. 2A), CT scan (Fig. 2B) and MRI (Fig. 2C) revealed an anterior
inferior iliac spine avulsion fracture. Therefore, the patient underwent open reduction and internal ﬁxation using the anterior ap-
proach, reattachment of rectus femoris to its anatomical location on the anterior inferior iliac spine using cannulated screw and two
anchors (Fig. 3). Two months post-op, the patient regained full range of motion of his hip and was pain free.

Currently, patient remains pain free with return to normal previous activities without any complaints.

Discussion

The complications rate in hip arthroscopy was found to be 15% [1]. Complications included traction-related, surgical technique
related and outcome-related problems. Traction-related problems can be traced to nerve injuries resulting from traction [1], often
caused to the sciatic nerve [8]. Surgical technique-related problems can be caused by breakage or failure of instruments, among
which causing labral perforation, femoral head scuﬃng, labrum injury occurring among patients with stiﬀ joints, etc. The outcome-
related complications include heterotopic bone formation along the gluteus medius as well as rapid progression towards osteoar-
thritis [1]. Other complications found in the literature included avascular necrosis of femoral head, DVT, infection, transitory par-
esthesia of the pudendal nerve, etc. [4,8].

Rectus femoris injuries more often occur in young athletes, rarely in the adult population. They usually are a result of forceful
kicking with abrupt arrest, causing avulsion of the rectus femoris at the anterior infericor iliac spine. Other described mechanisms
consist of sudden deceleration in running sports and hip hyperextension with a ﬂexed knee [7]. It has been postulated that patients
who underwent hip arthroscopy for FAI are prone to these injuries more than individuals with no previous surgery, lowering the
threshold for injury [7].

Operative vs non operative management of such injuries has been described in the literature [9,10]. Hsu et al. reported the cases
of two American football athletes who underwent non operative treatment, returning to kicking and normal activities at 6 weeks.

Fig. 2. (A) X-ray pelvis ap showing AIIS avulsion fracture. (B) CT scan reconstruction showing AIIS avulsion fracture. (C)Sagittal T2 MRI showing
avulsion fracture of AIIS.

2

J. Maalouly, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100342

Fig. 3. Right hip post AIIS avulsion fracture reduction and ﬁxation.

Furthermore, a case series of 11 american football players reported by Gamradt et al. returned to full activity after conservative
treatment. Five cases of AIIS avulsion sustained by four football players are described by Irmola et al. [11]. They underwent operative
treatment using suture anchors followed by protective hip bracing, with return to normal sports activity 9 months post-op. The
surgery of two of these patients was complicated by lateral cutaneous nerve palsy.

Conclusion

Numerous complications may occur following a hip arthroscopy, including traction-related, surgical-technique related and out-
come-related problems. The anterior inferior iliac spine avulsion fracture was not among the complications. The fracture described in
this case report might be the result of a surgical complication but could also have a diﬀerent origin, such as a trauma that was
unnoticed and reported by the patient, taking into consideration the nature of his sports activities consisting of forceful kicking and
hip hyperextension. Conservative management is of high importance in AIIS avulsion fractures, however when this fails, surgical
repair is required; hence surgeons should always weigh the beneﬁts of surgery taking into account the high complication rate in hip
arthroscopy.

Acknowledgements

Contributions by authors

Joseph Maalouly: Writing - Review & Editing
Dany Aouad: Writing - Review & Editing
Rami Ayoubi: Writing, editing
Mohammad Darwish: Editing, Review
Elias Saidy: Editing, Review
Nabil Dib: Writing and data collection
Alexandre Nehme: Resources, Supervision, writing, surgical technique

References

[1] M.S. Park, S.J. Yoon, Y.J. Kim, W.C. Chung, Hip arthroscopy for femoroacetabular impingement: the changing nature and severity of associated complications

over time, Arthroscopy: The Journal of Arthroscopic & Related Surgery 30 (8) (2014) 957–963.

[2] J.T. Byrd, K.S. Jones, Arthroscopic management of femoroacetabular impingement in athletes, Am. J. Sports Med. 39 (1_suppl) (2011) 7–13.
[3] A. Bedi, B.T. Kelly, Femoroacetabular impingement, JBJS 95 (1) (2013) 82–92.
[4] B.D. Roos, M.V. Roos, A. Camisa Júnior, E.M.U. Lima, D.P. Gyboski, L.S. Martins, Extracapsular approach for arthroscopic treatment of femoroacetabular

impingement: clinical and radiographic results and complications, Rev. Bras. Ortop. 50 (4) (2015) 430–437.

[5] M. Beck, M. Kalhor, M. Leunig, R. Ganz, Hip morphology inﬂuences the pattern of damage to the acetabular cartilage: femoroacetabular impingement as a cause

of early osteoarthritis of the hip, The Journal of bone and joint surgery. British volume 87 (7) (2005) 1012–1018.

[6] V.M. Ilizaliturri, Complications of arthroscopic femoroacetabular impingement treatment: a review, Clin. Orthop. Relat. Res. 467 (3) (2009) 760–768.
[7] B.M. Devitt, B. Smith, R. Stapf, J.M. O’Donnell, Avulsion of the direct head of rectus femoris following arthroscopic subspine impingement resection: a case

report, Journal of Hip Preservation Surgery 3 (1) (2015) 56–60, https://doi.org/10.1093/jhps/hnv072.

[8] M.J. Philippon, A.J. Stubbs, M.L. Schenker, R.B. Maxwell, R. Ganz, M. Leunig, Arthroscopic management of femoroacetabular impingement: osteoplasty

technique and literature review, Am. J. Sports Med. 35 (9) (2007) 1571–1580.

3

J. Maalouly, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100342

[9] S.C. Gamradt, R.H. Brophy, R. Barnes, et al., Nonoperative treatment for proximal avulsion of the rectus femoris in professional American football, Am. J. Sports

Med. 37 (2009) 1370–1374.

[10] J.C. Hsu, D.A. Fischer, R.W. Wright, Proximal rectus femoris avulsions in national football league kickers: a report of 2 cases, Am. J. Sports Med. 33 (2005)

1085–1087.

[11] T. Irmola, J.T. Heikkila, S. Orava, et al., Total proximal tendon avulsion of the rectus femoris muscle, Scand. J. Med. Sci. Sports 17 (2007) 378–382.

4

