Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100340

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Trauma Case Reports

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/tcr

Case Report
Delayed cardiac tamponade following blunt chest trauma due to
disruption of fourth costal cartilage with posterior dislocation
S. Mohameda, A. Osmana, A. Patela,b,⁎, K. Mazhara, L. Srinivasana,
L. Balacumaraswamia
a Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Royal Stoke University Hospital, Stoke On Trent, United Kingdom
b Institute of Immunology and Immunotherapy, University of Birmingham, Vincent Drive, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, United Kingdom

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Cardiac tamponade
Haemothorax
Pneumothorax
Thoracoscopy
Costal cartilage

Introduction

Cardiac tamponade is a recognised sequelae of non-penetrating and penetrating chest trauma.
Delayed cardiac tamponade has been described following blunt chest trauma. We present a
29 year-old gentleman who had initially presented to peripheral district general hospital fol-
lowing direct blunt chest wall trauma. His initial trauma CT demonstrated a small mediastinal
haematoma and large left haemopneumothorax and disruption/dislocation of the costal cartilage.
He initially underwent a thoracoscopic procedure uneventfully. He then had worsening chest
radiograph appearances with enlarging cardiac contours. Transthoracic echocardiography con-
ﬁrmed cardiac tamponade. He underwent creation of a pericardial window and excision of the
protruding fourth costal cartilage.

Cardiac tamponade is a recognised sequelae of non-penetrating and penetrating chest trauma. However, blunt chest trauma rarely
leads to cardiac tamponade hence the management is often guided by development of symptoms and ﬁndings on imaging [1]. There
are several case reports which mention the development of cardiac tamponade following minor and more signiﬁcant chest wall
trauma with usual onset of symptoms 4–6 weeks following the injury [1,2]. Cardiac tamponade following blunt chest trauma can be
attributable to multiple causes and the diagnosis is conﬁrmed from the ﬂuid that is aspirated/drained. Serous ﬂuid often indicative of
a reactive process from resultant myocarditis/pericarditis or as a post-cardiac injury syndrome. Haemorrhagic ﬂuid is indicative of
direct cardiac injury. The mechanism in the development of haemorrhagic cardiac tamponade following blunt chest wall trauma can
be related to a sheer-stress acceleration/deceleration injury resulting in an avulsion/traction type injury to the heart. Furthermore,
cardiac tamponade can occur as a late sequelae of myocardial contusion and through the laceration of the right ventricle [3]. The
clinical presentation of these patients can have a wide degree of variance from initially patients who have distracting injuries as part
of their poly-trauma or patients who are initially asymptomatic due to no pericardial collection but developing progressive dyspnoea
and symptoms of heart failure as the pericardial tamponade evolves. Transthoracic echocardiography conﬁrms the diagnosis fol-
lowing initial identiﬁcation of a pericardial collection on computer tomography or magnetic resonance imaging. We describe an
unusual case of delayed cardiac tamponade following blunt chest wall trauma due to the mechanism of right ventricular injury
secondary to left costal cartilage disruption causing three weeks after the index injury.

⁎ Corresponding author at: Institute of Immunology and Immunotherapy, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, United

Kingdom.

E-mail address: ajp.788@gmail.com (A. Patel).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcr.2020.100340
Accepted 27 July 2020
Available online 28 July 2020
2352-6440/ Crown Copyright © 2020 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).

S. Mohamed, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100340

Fig. 1. Panel A - CT scan demonstrating, a. large left haemothorax (arrow), and b. left fourth rib fracture and disruption/dislocation of the costal
cartilage medially (circled). Panels B and C - chest radiographs taken one week apart showing sizable increase in cardiac contours; A. on admission,
B. one week post admission.

Case discussion

We present a 29 year-old gentleman who had initially presented to peripheral district general hospital following direct blunt chest
wall trauma. He had fallen 9 ft oﬀ a zip wire and landed onto his left chest against a tree stump. He had no signiﬁcant co-morbidities.
On primary survey and trauma imaging he was noted to have a large left haemothorax but was haemodynamically stable. His initial
trauma CT demonstrated a small mediastinal haematoma, large left haemo-pneumothorax, left fourth rib fracture and disruption/
dislocation of the costal cartilage medially; there was no contrast extravasation or apparent injury to the left internal thoracic artery
(LITA) despite its close proximity (see Fig. 1a and Fig. 1b). There was no great vessel injury, pericardial collection or sternal fracture
identiﬁed on initial imaging. He had a left intercostal drain placed and this drained two litres of dark haemorrhagic ﬂuid consistent
with a massive left haemothorax. He required blood transfusion of ﬁve units of packed red cells to increase his haemoglobin level to
134 g/l and four units of fresh frozen plasma. Following stabilisation the patient was transferred to our institution for further
deﬁnitive care. He underwent a left-sided video-assisted thoracoscopic procedure with drainage of the haemothorax and washout of
the left hemithorax. Operative ﬁndings were that of 500mls of clot in the left costophrenic angle but no bleeding point or evidence of
pericardial collection or lung injury identiﬁed and the LITA seemed intact. Moreover the fourth costal cartilage disruption was not
immediately evident and there was no obvious retropulsion of the segment seen.

Following the initial procedure the patient remained in hospital for a few days and seemed relatively well. However, over the
course of the next week the patient seemed to become progressively dyspnoeic with worsening chest radiograph appearances with
enlarging cardiac contours (see Fig. 2). He underwent subsequent CT imaging which conﬁrmed the presence of a large pericardial
eﬀusion maximally measuring 3.8 cm and small bilateral eﬀusions (see Fig. 3). Subsequently an MRI scan was performed to assess for
any underlying cardiac disease such as cardiomyopathy or any evidence of traumatic cardiac injury such as myocardial contusion

2

S. Mohamed, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100340

Fig. 2. Panel A - Repeat CT imaging which conﬁrmed the presence of an enlarging pericardial eﬀusion and bilateral pleural eﬀusions. Panel B - MRI
scan demonstrating the pericardial eﬀusion.

which was also excluded, but again conﬁrmed the presence of a large pericardial eﬀusion measuring 3.4 cm causing septal bounce
and rippling of the right atrial and right ventricular wall which could be suggestive of early tamponade (see ﬁg. 4). Transthoracic
echocardiography conﬁrmed a moderate pericardial eﬀusion maximally measuring 2.4 cm around the LV causing diastolic septal
bounce and bowing of the free right ventricular wall. Due to the ﬁndings mentioned above he was taken back to theatre for drainage
of the pericardial collection and creation of a pericardial window through a minimally invasive left subcostal incision. Operative
ﬁndings conﬁrmed cardiac tamponade with a starting central venous pressure of 16 falling to 9 upon release of the collection of old
haemorrhagic ﬂuid and clot and there were dense adhesions which were carefully dissected oﬀ the pericardium and loculations
broken down. The fourth costal cartilage had been displaced posteriorly and likely to have caused pericardial irritation and myo-
cardial contusion. This costal cartilage was shaved oﬀ and excised to prevent further injury. He progressed satisfactorily post-
operatively and was discharged a week later following a normal transthoracic echocardiography scan.

Discussion

Cardiac tamponade is a life-threatening sequelae of thoracic trauma. Its occurrence following blunt chest trauma has been well-
described previously and even as a delayed presentation presenting a few weeks later following the initial injury [3,4]. This case
exempliﬁes the high index of suspicion required for associated cardiac injuries in apparent chest wall trauma with particular at-
tention to injuries that cause medial disruption of the costal cartilage with likelihood of posterior displacement. Consequentially,
pericardial and right ventricular injury can occur leading to delayed cardiac tamponade as this has occurred following the index
injury and initial presentation. Prompt recognition and treatment mandates a successful prognosis with no long-term complications.
Treatment can be multi-modal with interventional and invasive surgical options available but therapy should achieve resolution of
cardiac tamponade and address the cause and in this case the fourth costal cartilage from which the injury was attributable was duly
excised. In summary, delayed cardiac tamponade can occur as a consequence from blunt chest wall trauma and needs a high index of
suspicion for early recognition of delayed cardiac injury.

Contributions

SM, AJP: Conceptualization; Data curation; Formal analysis; Investigation; Methodology; Validation; Visualization; Roles/Writing

- original draft; Writing - review & editing.

SM, AJP designed and constructed the manuscript.
AO, KM: Data curation; Formal analysis; Investigation; Methodology.
LS and LB supervised the project and provided constructive critique to the manuscript.

Declaration of competing interest

None to declare.

Acknowledgements

Financial support: None to declare.

References

[1] J.A. Hermens, E.M. Wajon, J.G. Grandjean, M.M. Haalebos, C. von Birgelen, Delayed cardiac tamponade in a patient with previous minor blunt chest trauma, Int.

J. Cardiol. 131 (3) (2009) 124–126 24.

[2] S. Davey, F. Alam, S. Malik, A delayed presentation of cardiac tamponade after blunt trauma, J Surg Case Rep (9) (2011) 1–3.

3

S. Mohamed, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100340

[3] R. Fadel, A. El-Menyar, S. ElKafrawy, M.G. Gad, Traumatic blunt cardiac injuries: an updated narrative review, Int J Crit Illn Inj Sci 9 (3) (2019) 113–119.
[4] A. El-Menyar, H. Al Thani, A. Zarour, R. Latiﬁ, Understanding traumatic blunt cardiac injury, Ann. Card. Anaesth. 15 (2012) 287–295.

4

