Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100352

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Trauma Case Reports 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/tcr 

Case Report 
Endovascular occlusion of iatrogenic lumbar artery 
pseudoaneurysm using liquid embolic agent: Case report 
Jose C. Méndeza,⁎, Eduardo Fandinoa, Isaber Bermúdez-Coronela, Maria A. Prietob,  
Javier Blázqueza 
a Radiology Department, Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal, Madrid, Spain 
b Anesthesiology Department, Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal, Madrid, Spain  

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
Pseudoaneurysm 
Lumbar artery 
Endovascular occlusion 

Case report 

We describe a case of iatrogenic pseudoaneurysm of the fourth lumbar artery as a complication 
after transpedicular screw fixation in the lumbar spine. The lesion was succesfully occluded with 
endovascular liquic embolic agent infusion and the patient was fully recovered.  

A 72-year-old male patient treated with oral anticoagulant for prosthetic heart valve presented long-term lower back pain and 
neurogenic intermittent claudication. Lumbar spine magnetic resonance (MR) image revealed severe lumbar scoliosis and L3-S1 
spinal stenosis due to adjacent segment degeneration. The patient underwent T12–S1 posterior lumbar fusion with instrumentation. 
Oral anticoagulation was discontinued 5 days before surgery and replaced with low-molecular-weight-heparin (LMWH). The patient 
made an uneventful postoperative recovery and LMWH was initiated 24 h after surgery. 
Three days after surgery, the patient present acute onset monoplegia affecting the left lower limb, and general discomfort with 
abdominal pain with sweating. Low hemoglobin level (6.4 g/dl) was observed on blood test. A CT scan revealed a large posterior 
epidural and paravertebral hematoma and an acute hematoma in the left psoas muscle suggesting pseudoaneurysm (Fig. 1). LMWH 
was discontinued. A diagnostic spinal angiogram was performed via right common femoral artery. Selective second left lumbar 
injection demonstrated two pseudoaneurysms in the left paravertebral space (Fig. 2A). 
A decision was made to treat the pseudoaneurysms with selective embolization. A microcatheter with a detachable tip (Sonic 
1.5F; Balt, Montmorency, France) with a 0.08-in. micro-guide wire (Hybrid; Balt, Montmorency, France) was advanced in a coaxial 
fashion  through  a  5-French  diagnostic  catheter  across  the  lumbar  artery  to  reach  the  lumen  of  the  proximal  pseudoaneurysm 
(Fig. 2B). A total of 4 ml of high-density liquid embolic agent (Squid 18; BALT, Montmorency, France) were injected through the 
microcatheter in the proximal pseudoaneurysm, and both pseudoaneurysms were succesfully occluded in the final control angiogram 
(Fig. 2C). 
The patient was then re-operated and the posterior paravertebral and epidural hematoma was drained. On the first day after 
surgery, the patient was mobile and he reported significant pain relief. He was hemodynamically stable. LWMH was then initiated 
and replaced with oral anticoagulation after 24 h. After a few days, the patient's overall condition improved significantly and he was 
discharged two weeks after hematoma evacuation. 

⁎ Corresponding author at: Radiology Department, Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal, Carretera de Colmenar Viejo, km 9,100, 28035 Madrid, 
Spain. 
E-mail address: jmendezce@gmail.com (J.C. Méndez). 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcr.2020.100352 
Accepted 7 August 2020    
Available online 10 August 2020
2352-6440/ © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).

J.C. Méndez, et al.   

Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100352

Fig. 1. Contrast-enhanced abdominal CT scan shows a large posterior paravertebral and epidular collection and a hyperdense hematoma the left 
psoas muscle at the level of L2. 

Discussion 

False aneurysms or pseudoaneurysms result from transmural rupture of the arterial wall and formation of a hematoma that 
remains in communication with the arterial lumen. This haematoma grows gradually and encroach upon the surrounding tissues. 
Sometimes the pseudoaneurysm can rupture causing massive hemorrhage which can be life threatening [1]. 
The therapeutic options have evolved over recent years and go from traditional surgery to less invasive approaches as echo-guided 
compression, percutaneous thrombin injection and endovascular procedures (embolization or placement of endoprostheses) [2]. 
Arteriography is indicated for hemodynamically stable patients, both for diagnosing and for treating hemorrhage by means of em-
bolization. Endovascular approaches are the gold standard for treating deep arterial hemorrhage. 
Selective embolization of pseudoaneuryms with liquic embolic agent has proven to be an effective technique for achieving 
complete occlusion of pseudoaneurysms, with no recurrences during follow-up [3–5]. Intraaneurysmal controlled injection of high- 
viscosity embolic liquid allows total pseudoaneurysm occlusion and parent artery preservation in most cases, with no further risk of 
aneurysm recanalization from colateral arteries. 
Pseudoaneurysm of the lumbar arteries has been described as a result of penetrating injuries or blunt trauma [3]. The time at 
which pseudoaneurysm is presented is variable and can be at any time from the original injury until years later. 
Only a few cases of iatrogenic lumbar injury following transpedicular screw fixation have been reported in the literature and most 
of them have a rapid course with hemodynamic deterioration. Lee et al. [4] described a massive hemorrhage of the lumbar artery 
after surgery to correct scoliosis in a 23-year-old patient, which led death of the patient several hours after surgery. Sandri et al. [5] 
reported a lumbar artery injury with sudden hemodynamic disorders following posterior spinal instrumentation for scoliosis, which 
was resolved with endovascular coiling. Latka et al. [6] described a lumbar artery pseudoaneurysm with delayed progression and 
gradual  neurological  deterioration  without  hemodynamic  disturbances.  The  pseudoaneurysm  was  occluded  with  endovascular 
coiling. 
Lumbar artery pseudoaneurysm is an uncommon but potentially life-threatening complication of lumbar screw fixation and 
should be considered in patients that present with flank pain and hemodynamic instability following surgery. 
Selective lumbar arteriography should be performed to rule out lumbar arterial injury and liquid embolic embolization can be a 
safe and effective method of controlling the bleeding. 

2

J.C. Méndez, et al.   

Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100352

Fig. 2. . A. Selective angiography shows two pseudoaneurysms at the left second lumbar artery. B. Supraselective microcatheterism of the proximal 
pseudoaneurysm. C. Selective angiography after embolization shows occlusion of the pseudoaneurysm with preservation of the lumbar artery. 

References 

Trauma 8 (3) (2017) 276–280 Jul-Sep. 

[1] B. Mohan, S. Singal, A.S. Bawa, P. Mahindra, M. Yamin, Endovascular management of traumatic pseudoaneurysm: short & long term outcomes, J Clin Orthop 
[2] N. Tulsyan, et al., The endovascular management of visceral artery aneurysms and pseudoaneurysms, J. Vasc. Surg. 45 (2) (2007 Feb) 276–283 discussion 283. 
[3] S. Vashisht, V. Bachhal, V. Kumar, D. Kumar, Lumbar artery pseudoaneurysm following blunt trauma: a case report and literature review, Trauma Case Rep 23 
[4] K.H. Lee, J.H. Park, J.W. Chung, et al., Vascular complications in lumbar spinal surgery: percutaneous endovascular treatment, Cardiovasc. Intervent. Radiol. 23 
[5] A. Sandri, D. Regis, M.A. Marino, et al., Lumbar artery injury following posterior spinal instrumentation for scoliosis, Orthopedics 34 (4) (2011) 24. 
[6] K. Latka, et al., Iatrogenic lumbar artery pseudoaneurysm after lumbar transpedicular fixation: case report, SAGE Open Medical Case Reports 7 (2019) 1–4.  

(2019 Oct) 100232 (Álvarez Postigo M1, Pizones Arce J2, Izquierdo Núñez E3). 
(1) (2000) 65–69. 

3

