Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100345

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Trauma Case Reports

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/tcr

Case Report
Isolated traumatic posterior dislocation of the radial head in an
adult, a rare injury: New case report
Hélder Fonte⁎, Cláudia Rodrigues, João Vale, Joaquim Ramos, José Costa e Castro

Orthopaedics Department, Centro Hospitalar Universitário do Porto EPE, Porto, Portugal

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Elbow
Traumatic dislocation
Radial head
Isolated
Adult

Introduction

Isolated radial head dislocations are rare in adults with only 23 cases published in 45 years. The
diagnosis may be easily missed on radiographs and a CT-scan is often required. If managed
promptly patient can restore normal range of motion and elbow function. Authors report a new
case of a 67-year-old female presenting a posttraumatic isolated posterior dislocation of the radial
head. Treatment consisted of closed reduction followed by immobilization for four weeks in a
plaster cast with the elbow ﬂexed at 90°, followed by active mobilization and physiotherapy. At
18 months of follow-up, functional outcome is excellent with no diﬀerences between both sides.

Isolated dislocation of the radial head without concomitant ulnar fracture or humeroulnar subluxation in adults is a rare injury,
thereafter it can be easily unnoticed. Most of the reported cases suﬀered from posterior dislocation of radial head [1]. The evolved
pathomechanism is unclear and the treatment is controversial [2]. We report a case of isolated, acute posttraumatic posterior dis-
location of radial head in an adult, treated conservatively and with complete clinical and functional recovery, with 18 months of
follow-up.

Statement of informed consent

Informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case.

Case presentation

A 67-year-old woman, with no signiﬁcant history, presented at the emergency department at our hospital after a fall of her height
on the outstretched hand of her dominant upper limb, with indirect trauma of the right elbow. We speculate the mechanism in our
patient to be hyperextension of the elbow with forearm in prone position. She had immediate onset of pain and presented with the
elbow held in 90° of ﬂexion and partial pronation, unable to mobilize the joint. Minimal swelling and some degree of tenderness were
present on the lateral aspect of the elbow. Neurovascular examination of the upper limb was normal, with no evidence of posterior
interosseous nerve palsy. An imaging study with radiographs and a CT-scan with three-dimensional reconstruction (Fig. 1) was
performed, which revealed a posterior dislocation of the radial head, with no evidence of fractures or other concomitant injuries,
neither lesions on homolateral shoulder or wrist. Closed reduction was achieved with gentle traction, by extending and supinating the

⁎ Corresponding author at: Largo do Prof. Abel Salazar, 4099-001 Porto, Portugal.
E-mail address: u11681@chporto.min-saude.pt (H. Fonte).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcr.2020.100345
Accepted 27 July 2020
Available online 31 July 2020
2352-6440/ © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).

H. Fonte, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100345

Fig. 1. X-Ray and CT scan (sagittal view and 3D reconstruction) of the right elbow, performed in the emergency department, showing a posterior
isolated radial head dislocation, no evidence of fractures or other concomitant injuries.

forearm and applying pressure on the radial head (Fig. 2). Immobilization was done with an above elbow posterior cast with the
elbow in 90° of ﬂexion and slightly pronated which was maintained for four weeks. Further screening was done weekly to make sure
that the radial head was in a reduced position. Active elbow mobilization was started after removal of the cast and the patient
underwent a supervised physiotherapy program. At 6 months of follow-up, the patient had recovered clinically and functionally, with
complete ﬂexion-extension, 0–90° of supination, 0–80° of pronation. At 18 months of follow-up, functional outcome is excellent
compared with the contralateral elbow with no diﬀerences between both sides (Fig. 3) and there was no recurrence of the lesion and
the radiograph evaluation revealed no signs of complications (Fig. 4).

Discussion

Isolated dislocation of radial head is sparsely reported in the literature, with 23 cases published in 45 years. It has been pre-
dominantly posterior [3]. Whereas the dislocation of the radial head occurs usually associated with fractures of the forearm, like in
the setting of a Monteggia lesion, isolated dislocation is extremely rare in adults [1,2]. A large number of previously reported isolated
dislocations of the radial head in children are now thought to represent radial head dislocations accompanied by ulnar bowing [1,4].
Radial head dislocation accompanied by ulnar bowing has not been described in adults, with only a few cases of truly isolated
dislocations of the radial head have been reported. This frequency seems underestimated because this lesion probably corresponds to
an aborted postero-lateral elbow dislocation [5]. Numerous studies have examined distal radioulnar joint instability, but a paucity of
information exists regarding the biomechanics of the proximal radioulnar joint [2]. The mechanism leading to an isolated radial head
dislocation has been variously described and most authors describe an indirect trauma [6,7]. Various mechanisms have been pos-
tulated for isolated dislocation of radial head, like hyperpronating force acting on an already pronated forearm while falling
backwards with an extended elbow or falling forward on an extended elbow with the forearm in pronation and rolling of the body
causing further hyperpronation [7]. Bonatus et al. speculated the injury to occur in a position of hyperextension and supination and
also proposed that the reduction manoeuvre to reduce the dislocation depended upon initial position of the forearm at presentation.
Those presenting with the forearm in pronation required a supination force for reduction and vice versa [7].

To diagnose and reduce the dislocation promptly is of utmost importance. It can be easily missed on elbow radiographs and it is of
paramount importance to have a high level of suspicion. The CT-scan seems important in this setting to identify the isolated radial
head dislocation and exclude concomitant injuries. There is no consensus on which position of forearm rotation is best for

Fig. 2. X-Ray and CT-scan performed after closed reduction and immobilization, showing a correct reduction.

2

H. Fonte, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100345

Fig. 3. Right elbow with normal range-of-motion at 18 months of follow-up (A – ﬂexion, B – extension, C – supination, D – pronation).

Fig. 4. X-Ray at 18 months of follow-up, showing no signs of complications.

stabilization of the radial head [2]. Several authors have recommended that the forearm be immobilized in supination rather than in
neutral rotation or pronation, while others have recommended the neutral rotation after manual reduction of the radial head [8–10].
Closed reduction has been successful in most of the reported injuries like it was in this presenting case. In very few situations, open
reduction has been required [3]. The results comparing stability among diﬀerent forearm positions indicate that the ideal stabilizing
position may diﬀer depending on the direction of radial head dislocation. In patients with lateral radial head dislocation, supination
may be recommended during post-reduction immobilization. In contrast, immobilization in pronation is recommended following
closed reduction of posterior radial head dislocation [10].

Because radial head instability sometimes develops after reduction, treatments such as radial head excision, Kirschner-wire
ﬁxation, and modiﬁed Bell-Tawse repair have been proposed [1]. Closed reduction may not be successful in all cases. After the
reduction, stability should always be checked. Such injuries should be addressed on a priority basis to prevent complications as elbow
stiﬀness or recurrent radial head instability [5].

In conclusion, posttraumatic isolated radial head dislocations are extremely rare in adults and require a high index of suspicion.
The diagnosis may be easily missed on radiographs and a CT-scan is often required. Early reduction is important to avoid the
necessity for surgical treatment and its associated complications. If managed promptly and under a regular and supervised phy-
siotherapy regime, the patient can restore normal range of motion and elbow function.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no conﬂicts of interest concerning this paper.

References

[1] K. Watanabe, S. Iwabu, T. Hosoya, Traumatic isolated anterior dislocation of the radial head in an adult: a case report, J. Shoulder Elb. Surg. 14 (2005) 554–556.
[2] N. Hayami, et al., Biomechanical study of isolated radial head dislocation, BMC Musculoskelet. Disord. 18 (2017) 1–7.
[3] L. Obert, D. Hout, D. Lepage, P. Garbuio, Y. Tropet, Luxation traumatique isolée de la tête radiale chez l’adulte: À propos d’un cas et revue de la littérature, Chir.

Main 22 (2003) 216–219.

[4] Lincoln, T. L. & Mubarak, S. J. ‘Isolated’ traumatic radial-head dislocation. J. Pediatr. Orthop. 14, 454–7.
[5] R. Kansay, S. Gupta, A. Soni, A. Malhotra, S.K. Garg, Isolated anterior dislocation of radial head in an adult with atypical presentation: a case report, Rev. Bras.

3

H. Fonte, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100345

Ortop. (English Ed.) (2018) 8–12, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rboe.2018.03.003.

[6] N. Manasseh, V. Madhuri, T.S. Jepegnanam, V.T. Kayalakagathu, Isolated, traumatic anterior dislocation of the radial head in an adult, Eur. J. Trauma 31 (2005)

170–173.

[7] T. Bonatus, M.W. Chapman, N. Felix, Traumatic anterior dislocation of the radial head in an adult, J. Orthop. Trauma 9 (1995) 441–444.
[8] E. Horii, et al., Surgical treatment for chronic radial head dislocation, J. Bone Joint Surg. Am. 84-A (2002) 1183–1188.
[9] K. Oka, T. Murase, H. Moritomo, K. Sugamoto, H. Yoshikawa, Morphologic evaluation of chronic radial head dislocation: three-dimensional and quantitative

analyses, Clin. Orthop. Relat. Res. 468 (2010) 2410–2418.

[10] A. Dhawan, P.P. Hospodar, Isolated posttraumatic posterior dislocation of the radial head in an adult, Am. J. Orthop. (Belle Mead. NJ) 31 (83–6) (2002).

4

