Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100349

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Trauma Case Reports

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/tcr

Case Report
Isolated dorsal dislocation of the distal radioulnar joint: A case
report
M.A. Haouzi⁎, R.A. Bassir, M. Boufettal, M. Kharmaz, M.O. Lamrani, M. Mahfoud,
A. El Bardouni, M.S. Berrada
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery & Traumatology, Ibn Sina Hospital, University Mohamed V, Rabat, Morocco

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Distal radioulnar joint
Dorsal
Dislocation
Closed reduction

Introduction

Isolated distal radioulnar joint (DRUJ) dislocation is a rare injury. Reports of isolated DRUJ
luxations, volar or dorsal, are often case reports and rarely a series of cases. We present a case of
an isolated acute dorsal dislocation of the distal radioulnar joint in a 25-year-old man. The pa-
tient underwent closed reduction and a transcutaneous radioulnar pinning was done followed by
cast immobilization in neutral rotation during 6 weeks. After six months follow -up, the func-
tional result was satisfactory, patient experienced no pain and had no restrictions in work or
sports-related activities.

Isolated acute distal radioulnar joint (DRUJ) dislocation is a rare injury. Reports of isolated DRUJ dislocations, volar or dorsal, are
often case reports and rarely a series of cases. This injury is overlooked in as many as 50% of cases, especially when not associated
with a fracture [1]. We present a case of an Isolated acute distal radioulnar joint (DRUJ) dislocation in a 25-year-old man victim of a
motorcycle accident. Patient underwent closed reduction and temporary stabilization using K-wires. The functional result was sa-
tisfactory.

Case report

A 25-year-old man, right hand dominant, was admitted to the Emergency department following a motorcycle accident. He
presented with left wrist pain and deformity and inability to rotate his forearm. Physical examination revealed a dorsal prominence of
the ulnar head with a positive piano-key test. Movement of wrist was limited, movement of ﬁngers was normal. There were no
sensory or motor deﬁcit and distal pulses were intact, and the skin was intact. Anteroposterior and lateral radiographs showed no
bone injury. One the lateral view, a posterior displacement of the ulna was shown (Figs. 1, 2). A distal dorsal radio-ulnar dislocation
was diagnosed. In the Operating room under general anesthesia, closed reduction was accomplished by applying digital pressure on
the distal end of the ulna, while forearm was being gently supinated. The distal radio-ulnar joint was stabilised with percutaneous
Kirschner-wire pinning in reduced position (Fig. 3), followed by cast immobilization in neutral rotation during 6 weeks. K-wires were
removed at 6 weeks post-operatively followed by progressive physiotherapy for 10 weeks. Six months after surgery, total range of
movement was allowed, patient experienced no pain and had no restrictions in work or sports-related activities. His wrist was stable
and had the same strength as his uninjured side (Fig. 4).

⁎ Corresponding author at: Allotment Jawhara, 25, Bir rami east, Kenitra, Morocco.
E-mail address: ruchardamine@gmail.com (M.A. Haouzi).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcr.2020.100349
Accepted 27 July 2020
Available online 29 July 2020
2352-6440/ © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).

M.A. Haouzi, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100349

Fig. 1. X-rays of the forearm at initial presentation: A: antero-posterior radiograph, B: lateral radiograph.

Discussion

Fig. 2. X-rays of the elbow at initial presentation.

The distal radioulnar joint (DRUJ) is a diarthrodial, synovial articulation that provides the distal link between the radius and ulna
and a pivot for pronation-supination [2]. The primary stabilizer of the DRUJ is the TFCC, originally described by Palmer and Werner
[3]. The TFCC is composed of several structures, including the triangular ﬁbrocartilage (TFC), the ulnocarpal meniscus (meniscus
homolog), the ulnar collateral ligament, the dorsal radioulnar ligament, the palmar radioulnar ligament, and the subsheath of the
extensor carpi ulnaris (ECU). These structures are not readily distinguishable on anatomic dissection and together are referred to as
the TFCC [4].

Dislocation of the distal radioulnar joint (DRUJ) is most often associated with fracture of the radius or ulna, and isolated DRUJ
dislocation without fracture is uncommon. Acute isolated dislocation of the distal radioulnar joint without fracture was ﬁrst described
in a cadaver in 1777 by Desault [5]. Since then, information about this particular disorder has come mainly through case reports and
a small series of cases [6]. It is an injury that can be missed initially due to subtle signs and interpretation of inadequate radiographs.
This injury, if misdiagnosed or mistreated, results in a complete loss of pronation- supination, which entails a great functional
limitation [7]. The dorsal dislocation is more common with the ulna moving dorsally in relation to the radius following hyper-
extension of the wrist with hyperpronation forces [8]. Clinically, the wrist is locked in pronation with the patient unable to supinate.
The diagnosis can be suspected on the basis of the clinical history and of physical examination, and conﬁrmed by radiographic
examination. Anteroposterior radiographs in a dorsal dislocation typically show a widened DRUJ with divergence of the radius and
ulna when compared with the contralateral normal DRUJ [4]. A true lateral X-ray conﬁrms the diagnosis. Any rotation of the forearm

2

M.A. Haouzi, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100349

Fig. 3. Postoperative X-rays.

Fig. 4. Final clinical result: A: full pronation, B: full supination.

during radiographic examination will change the relative position of the ulna making the diagnosis diﬃcult. Therefore, one must be
careful in the interpretation of these radiographs. Some authors suggest a lateral X-ray showing both wrists on a single ﬁlm [9]. If the
diagnosis is uncertain, it can be conﬁrmed by further imaging like CT scan or Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), which demonstrates
any joint incongruence.

Treatment of the acute dislocation without fracture begins with closed reduction. This treatment is typically accomplished under
local anesthesia with or without sedation. In dorsal dislocations of the ulna, reduction is accomplished with gentle traction, dorsal
pressure (translational force) over the ulnar head, and supination. The joint must be assessed for instability and typically is most
stable in supination [4]. The forearm is immobilized in an above elbow cast in the position of maximal stability for a period of
6 weeks. Because of the vascularity and healing potential of the peripheral TFCC, closed treatment is frequently successful in the
restoration of a stable construct [10,11]. If instability persists after reduction, radioulnar pinning is done in reduced position to allow
soft tissue healing [7,12], using one or two Kirschner (K) wires just proximal to the DRUJ [4]. If the dislocation proves to be
irreducible even with conscious sedation or general anesthesia, open reduction in combination with repair of the TFCC is re-
commended [9].

3

M.A. Haouzi, et al.

Conclusion

Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100349

Distal radioulnar joint (DRUJ) dislocation without an associated fracture is uncommon. It is an injury that can be missed initially
due to subtle signs and interpretation of inadequate radiographs. High degree of clinical suspicion and proper X-ray is required for
prompt detection.

Consent

Patient gives informed consent for publication.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors report no conﬂicts of interest. The authors alone are responsible for the content and writing of the paper.

Acknowledgements

This research received no speciﬁc grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial, or not-for-proﬁt sectors.

References

[1] R.K. Rainey, M.L. Pfautsh, Traumatic dislocation of the distal radioulnar joint, Orthopedics 8 (1985) 896–900.
[2] B.D. Adams, Acute DRUJ instability, Disorders Hand (2014) 379–389.
[3] A.K. Palmer, F.W. Werner, The triangular ﬁbrocartilage complex of the wrist—anatomy and function, J. Hand. Surg. [Am.] 6 (2) (1981) 153–162.
[4] B.T. Carlsen, D.G. Dennison, S.L. Moran, Acute dislocations of the distal radioulnar joint and distal ulna fractures, Hand Clin. 26 (4) (2010) 503–516.
[5] F. Bouri, M. Fuad, A.E. Abdolenour, Locked volar radioulnar joint dislocation, Int. J. Surg. Case Rep. 22 (2016) 12–14.
[6] T.B. Dameron, Traumatic dislocation of the distal radio-ulnar joint, Clin. Orthop. Relat. Res. 83 (1972) 55–63.
[7] L. Fernandes, J. Sousa, F. Cruz, Chronic distal radioulnar joint dislocation: a case report, Revista Iberoamericana de Cirugía de La Mano 47 (02) (2019) 137–140.
[8] B. Thomas, R. Sreekanth, Distal radioulnar joint injuries, Indian J. Orthop. 46 (5) (2012 Sep-Oct) 493–504 46(5).
[9] Sander Wassink, Lukas A. Lisowski, Bernard G. Schutte, Traumatic recurrent distal radioulnar joint dislocation: a case report, Strat. Trauma Limb. Reconstr. 4 (3)

(2009) 141–143 Dec.

[10] M.S. Bednar, S.P. Arnoczky, A.J. Weiland, The microvasculature of the triangular ﬁbrocartilage complex: its clinical signiﬁcance, J. Hand. Surg. [Am.] 16 (6)

[11] L. Tarallo, R. Adani, F. Catani, Closed reduction of acute volar dislocation of the distal radioulnar joint, J. Hand Surg. Eur. 38 (2013) 572–574.
[12] D. McMurray, K. Muralikuttan, Volar dislocation of the distal radio–ulnar joint without fracture: a case report and literature review, Injury Extra 39 (11) (2008)

(1991) 1101–1105.

352–355.

4

