Trauma Case Reports 12 (2017) 16–18

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Trauma Case Reports

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/tcr

Case Report
Isolated orbital roof blow-in fracture
Kaitlyn M. Rountreea,⁎, John J. Blaseb

a Henry Ford Macomb Hospital, Clinton Township, MI, United States
b Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, MI, United States

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Orbital fracture
Blow-in fracture
Orbital roof
Facial trauma
Head injury

Case report

We report a rare case of a right orbital roof blow-in fracture in a 40-year-old male with con-
comitant basal skull fracture and intracranial hemorrhage after a fall backward. Trauma, neu-
rosurgery, ophthalmology, and maxillofacial surgery consultations were obtained. Conservative,
non-surgical management was recommended for all injuries, and outpatient follow up for orbital
fracture with no surgery oﬀered.

A 40-year-old male presented to the emergency department via EMS with hypothermia, soft tissue swelling of the posterior head,
and bilateral peri-orbital ecchymosis and edema after being found down on a cement walkway. He was found on his back at the
bottom of a short set of steps. Initial examination revealed “raccoon eyes,” bilateral periorbital edema and ecchymosis, but no
abrasion, laceration or other sign of direct trauma to the face [1]. Glasgow coma score was 14, and no neurological deﬁcit was
appreciated. The patient was intoxicated at time of presentation, blood alcohol level 0.31 g/dL, however he denied striking his face,
and recalled falling backward. There were no ﬁeld of gaze deﬁcits, no pain associated with eye movement, no gross disparity in globe
size on secondary survey. Trauma surgery and neurosurgery consultations were obtained following completion of imaging. Transfer
to a tertiary care center with ophthalmology and maxillofacial surgery was recommended and performed for management of orbital
fractures per recommendation of trauma team. Conservative, non-surgical management was recommended for all injuries, and
outpatient follow up at time of discharge for orbital fractures. The patient's hospital course was complicated by alcohol withdraw and
Clostridium diﬃcile colitis. He was discharged to a skilled nursing facility on hospital day seventeen.

Imaging ﬁndings

Noncontrast computed tomography scan (CT) of the head demonstrated contiguous, non-displaced skull fractures involving the
left occipital bone, right parietal bone, right temporal bone and extending through the right mastoid/middle ear with extensive
intracranial hematomas overlying the superior frontal and parietal convexities (Fig. 1). In addition, there were noted subarachnoid
hemorrhages within the basal and prepontine cisterns, and scattered pneumocephalus (Fig. 2). CT scan of the head and maxillofacial
structures was obtained and compared with a study from ﬁve days prior (Fig. 3). Dedicated maxillofacial CT scan demonstrated acute,
isolated blow-in fracture of the posterior roof of the right orbit and non-displaced fracture of the left orbital roof with accompanying
orbital hematomas (Fig. 4). The zygomatic arches, pterygoid plates and temporomandibular joints were all intact.

⁎ Corresponding author at: Henry Ford Macomb Hospital, 15855 Nineteen Mile Road, Clinton Township, MI 48038, United States.
E-mail address: krountr1@hfhs.org (K.M. Rountree).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcr.2017.10.008
Accepted 24 October 2017
Available online 08 November 2017
2352-6440/ © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).

K.M. Rountree, J.J. Blase

Trauma Case Reports 12 (2017) 16–18

A

B

Fig. 1. Axial non-contrast CT images. A) Large parietal scalp hematoma (red arrows). B) Nondisplaced parietal skull fracture (yellow arrows). (For interpretation of the
references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

A

B

Fig. 2. Axial noncontrast CT images of the brain. A) Bifrontal subdural hemorrhages (red arrows), left frontal hemorrhagic contusion (yellow arrow). B) Suprasellar
subarachnoid hemorrhage (red circle). Left cerebellar subdural hematoma. Extensive bifrontal subarachnoid and subdural hemorrhage (open arrows). (For inter-
pretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

A

B

Fig. 3. A) Coronal CT image in bone windowing from 5 days prior shows a normal right orbital roof. B) Coronal and Axial CT images at time of presentation shows a
displaced orbital “blow-in” fracture in the medial, posterior right orbital roof (red arrows). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the
reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

17

K.M. Rountree, J.J. Blase

Trauma Case Reports 12 (2017) 16–18

A

B

Fig. 4. A) Axial CT images at time of presentation shows a displaced orbital “blow-in” fracture in the medial, posterior right orbital roof (red arrows). B) Coronal CT
image in soft tissue windowing demonstrates an associated intraorbital hematoma (yellow arrows). There was a nondisplaced fracture of the left orbital roof as well as
a left orbital hematoma (red open arrow). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

Discussion

An isolated blow-in fracture is deﬁned as “inferior displacement of the orbital roof without involvement of the supraorbital rim or
the frontal sinus”, and is thought to be the result of increased intracranial pressure, a shift of the cranium, or a shift of the intracranial
contents [2]. In a single center review from Vermont, of 134 patients with occipital skull fractures 33% of patients had uncomplicated
hospital courses, 24% recovered with mild neurological deﬁcit and 14% died of their injuries. Of this same cohort 35% had severe
frontal contusions and/or hemorrhage. Three patients were noted to have countercoup associated fractures; two non-displaced orbital
roof fractures, and one patient with an ethmoid fracture and rhinorrhea. The most commonly associated trauma was falling backward
down steps with the occiput as the point of impact [3].

Orbital roof fractures are a relatively rare ﬁnding, reported incidence ranges from 1 to 9%. Most are accompanied by mid face
fractures, speciﬁcally zygomatic arch fracture from direct facial trauma [4]. A single center study of 1171 patients with blunt trauma
identiﬁed a 5% rate of orbital roof fracture with 87% of them having associated craniofacial fractures and 65% having intracranial
hemorrhage. There was also a 4 to 1 ratio of male to female patients, with fall being the most common mechanism of injury [5].
Available literature on blow-in orbital fractures is sparse, with only a handful of case reports discussing the topic. With the wide-
spread use of CT imaging for trauma, it is unlikely that this is a matter of under recognition or reporting, and potentially a result of
patients not surviving their concomitant injuries.

Conclusion

The patient presented here is suspected to have fulﬁlled the perfect storm of falling backward down steps, with direct occipital
trauma and coup countercoup injury inducing a pressure gradient high enough to produce an isolated blow-in fracture of the right
orbit and isolated non-displaced fracture of the left orbital roof. The management for this type of orbital is conservative in patients
with no loss of vision, diplopia, orb malposition or change in follow up exams [6].

Conﬂict of interest statement

None.

Acknowledgement

The authors wound like to acknowledge the contribution of Isaac Hinton, DO in the preparation of this manuscript.

References

[1] A. Somasundaram, A.W. Laxton, R.G. Perrin, The clinical features of periorbital ecchymosis in a series of trauma patients, Injury 45 (1) (2014) 203–205.
[2] A.L. Jones, K.E. Jones, Orbital roof “blow-in” fracture: a case report and review, J. Radiol. Case Rep. 3 (12) (2009) 25–30.
[3] H.A. Young, H.H. Schmidek, Complications accompanying occipital skull fracture, J. Trauma 22 (11) (1982) 914–920.
[4] H.S. Karabekir, et al., Ocular and periocular injuries associated with an isolated orbital fracture depending on a blunt cranial trauma: anatomical and surgical

aspects, J. Craniomaxillofac. Surg. 40 (7) (2012) e189–93.

[5] J.P. Cossman, et al., Traumatic orbital roof fractures: interdisciplinary evaluation and management, Plast. Reconstr. Surg. 133 (3) (2014) 335e–343e.
[6] U.A. Felding, et al., The functional outcome of blow-out fractures managed surgically and conservatively: our experience in 100 patients, Eur. Arch.

Otorhinolaryngol. 273 (7) (2016) 1927–1931.

18

