Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100337

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Trauma Case Reports

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/tcr

Case Report
Management of foot degloving injury with bilateral anterolateral
thigh ﬂaps
Pan Zhou, Xiaobin Cong, Zhenbing Chen⁎

Department of Hand Surgery, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430022, China

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Degloving injuries
Foot injuries
Salvage limb
Soft tissue defect
Surgical ﬂaps
Anterolateral thigh ﬂap

Introduction

Foot degloving injuries are frequently encountered by reconstructive surgeons as there are more
and more vehicles on the road. The separation between the deep facia and the superﬁcial skin
often damage the blood supply of the cutaneous tissue, resulting skin defect and digit necrosis. In
order to manage these challenging situations, reconstructive surgeons have explored various
types of techniques. Our team have managed to cure one such patient through bilateral ante-
rolateral thigh ﬂaps, in which the two ﬂaps cover the dorsal and plantar side respectively. The
ﬂaps survived uneventfully and second stage operation of defatting was consequently arranged.
The patient obtained protective sensation and felt satisﬁed with the cosmetic outcome. With the
development of microsurgery, bilateral anterolateral thigh ﬂaps could be eﬀectively adopted to
manage foot degloving injuries.

Foot degloving injuries used to be rare. Yet, with the development of modern society, we have seen persistent increase in the
number of this challenging situation, mainly caused by traﬃc accident. Forces between a ﬁxed surface and a moving object can easily
avulse the skin and separate the superﬁcial tissue from the deep facia, damaging the blood supply of the degloved skin and soft tissue.
Feet comprise a special anatomy and are of great importance to everyday life. To simply employ amputation will no doubt bring
both physical and emotional damage to the patient. So how to handle the degloved skin and soft tissue and help the patient salvage
the limb is the concern of reconstructive surgeons.

Our patient presented with extensive degloving injury of the left foot, involving both the dorsal and plantar side. He underwent
serial debridements, negative-pressure wound therapy, and bilateral anterolateral thigh ﬂaps. Rehabilitation and second stage de-
fatting operation were carried out consequently, achieving good functional and cosmetic results.

Case report

A 45-year-old man presented to the emergency department with his left foot degloved in a car accident. His vital signs were
normal, and he reported no special previous history. On physical examination, we found that both the dorsal and plantar skin of the
foot were degloved, with fracture of the calcaneus and dislocation of the tarsometatarsal joint. Despite these, the tendons and the ﬁve
toes were relatively intact.

The fracture and dislocation were ﬁxed with k-wires and external ﬁxation, with the degloved skin defatted and grafted upon the

⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: 2990430205@qq.com (Z. Chen).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcr.2020.100337
Accepted 27 July 2020
Available online 31 July 2020
2352-6440/ © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).

P. Zhou, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100337

Fig. 1. The dorsal (a) and plantar (b) side of the degloved foot after defatted skin graft. Hematoma was found under the plantar skin (c).

primary site. Vacuum assisted therapy was applied for one week. However, most of the grafted skin were lost [Fig. 1]. Following two
times of debridement, there left a large area of skin defect involving both the dorsal and the plantar side [Fig. 2], which posed a
challenge to us.

After a thorough communication, the patient was determined to receive bilateral anterolateral thigh (ALT) ﬂaps to salvage the
foot, rather than amputation. Based upon the precise defect of the foot, we designed on the left a 20 cm*16 cm ALT ﬂap for the dorsal
side, and on the right a 19.5 cm*15 cm ALT ﬂap for the plantar. The artery of the dorsal ﬂap was anastomosed to the pedis dorsalis
artery, with its vein to the great saphenous vein，both using an end-to-end technique. The plantar ﬂap was nourished by two separate
perforator vessels, and fabrication was performed so as to secure ﬂap blood supply. In order to protect the forefoot, the artery of the
plantar ﬂap was anastomosed, employing the end-to-side technique, to the posterior tibial artery, with its accompanying vein pro-
viding drainage [Fig. 3].

Flap donor sites were covered by split thickness skin grafts, and postoperative procedure went uneventfully.
Two months later, the patient went back and the k-wires as well as external ﬁxation was removed. He was encouraged to carry out
some rehabilitation exercise. Six months later, a defatting operation was performed to make it convenient for him to wear shoes. At
the last follow up, twelve months after the injury, the patient could walk independently and was satisﬁed with both functional and
aesthetic outcome (Fig. 4).

Discussion

Reconstructive surgeons have been struggling with foot degloving injuries for a long time, especially those with large area of soft
tissue defects. They have explored several techniques in order to salvage the limb, avoiding physical and psychological hurt that

Fig. 2. The dorsal (a) and plantar (b) side of the degloved foot after thorough debridement.

2

P. Zhou, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100337

Fig. 3. The dorsal side of foot was covered by an ALT ﬂap from the left (a) and the plantar side received an ALT ﬂap from the right (b).

Fig. 4. The dorsal (a) and plantar (b) side of the left foot at the latest follow up, twelve months after the injury.

amputation may bring to the patient.

Defatting and replacement of the degloved skin as a full-thickness graft have been widely accepted as eﬀective means to manage
the degloving injury. Josty I.C. et al. introduced their experience of vacuum assisted closure, which could provide constant con-
forming pressure to the replaced skin and increase the take of the graft [2].

For those patients involved with worse wound bed as well as unstable condition, immediate defatting and graft may sound
unacceptable. In this situation, Tian L. et al. adopted the technique of hypothermic preservation [4]. Full thickness-skin slices were
harvested and stored in liquid nitrogen until the wound granulation tissue was satisfactory. Hypothermic preservation was an ef-
fective and economical way in managing degloving injuries for not introducing additional trauma. However, lack of liquid nitrogen in
ordinary hospitals may limit its application.

With the development of microsurgery, various types of ﬂaps have been introduced to solve degloving injuries of the foot. Zhou
L.R. et al. used free latissimus dosi musculocutaneous ﬂap, distal-based lateral skin ﬂap of the leg and free tensor fasciae latae muscle
ﬂap successfully in their clinical practice [7].They deﬁned thorough debridement of the recipient area, appropriate selection of the
donor site, precise vascular anastomosis and active postoperative rehabilitation as four vital factors in achieving favourable results.
Furthermore, Zhang W.K. et al. creatively used a technique of free coupling chain-link ﬂap, which combined a posterior tibial artery
ﬂap and a medial plantar ﬂap together [6].

Zgonis T. et al. reported a case of a crossover reverse sural artery ﬂap for soft tissue coverage of the plantar aspect of a degloving
forefoot [5].It provided valuable solution when neither a suitable recipient vessel for anastomosis nor a suﬃcient local ﬂap was
available. Special attention should be paid to old patients with co-morbidities and children, for whom relatively conservative therapy
should be recommended. Damkat-Thomas L. et al. applied a novel synthetic biodegradable temporising matrix to cure an obese, 72-

3

P. Zhou, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100337

year-old diabetic man and Kaufman R. et al. employed an extracellular matrix for a 16-year-old girl [1,3]. These newly developed bio-
materials were proven to be useful, although they required a relatively long closure time.

Our team shared similar strategy with Zhang W.K. et al. [6]. In order to solve large area defect involving both the dorsal side and
the plantar side, we harvest bilateral anterolateral thigh ﬂap simultaneously. The two ﬂaps received independent blood supply, and
end-to-side anastomosis was carried out so as to protect the blood supply of the foot. We may also adopt the technique of chain link
ﬂap, when blood vessels of one ﬂap can be conveniently fabricated to those of the other. These should be determined according to
associated anatomical variations.

Considering the obstacles often faced during the microsurgery process, it did bring us great challenge to harvest two free ﬂaps

during one operation. Suﬃcient preparation should be ﬁxed, so alternative measures could be obtained when needed.

Conclusion

Foot degloving injuries comprise a group of challenging situations. Reconstructive surgeons may choose a therapy from their
toolbox according to the special condition of the patient. Bilateral anterolateral thigh ﬂaps could be of great help in repairing large
area of skin defect involving both the dorsal and the plantar side.

Acknowledgement

We thank Qingshan-Wang, who was studying in our department at that time, for his help in the ﬂap operation.

References

[1] L. Damkat-Thomas, J.E. Greenwood, M. Wagstaﬀ, A synthetic biodegradable temporising matrix in degloving lower extremity trauma reconstruction: a case

report, Plast. Reconstr. Surg. Glob. Open 7 (2019) e2110.

[2] I.C. Josty, R. Ramaswamy, J.H. Laing, Vaccum assisted closure: an alternative strategy in the management of degloving injuries of the foot, Br. J. Plast. Surg. 54

(2001) 363–365.

[3] R. Kaufman, J. Nguyen, B. Williams, et al., Treatment of traumatic degloving injury of the foot using a biologic dressing in a pediatric patient, Wounds 31 (2019)

E77–E81.

[4] L. Tian, X. Ji, T. Chen, et al., Deep hypothermic preservation of autologous skin in the treatment of large-area circumferential multi-plane degloving trauma: a

pilot study of 2 cases, Cell Tissue Bank. 20 (2019) 109–115.

[5] T. Zgonis, D.T. Cromack, J.J. Stapleton, Utilizing a crossover reverse sural artery ﬂap for soft tissue reconstruction of the plantar forefoot after a severe degloving

injury, Int. J. Low. Extrem. Wounds 6 (2007) 114–119.

[6] W.K. Zhang, W.K. Zhang, H.B. Wang, et al., Vacuum sealing drainage and free coupling chain-link posterior tibial artery ﬂap in the reconstruction of degloving

injury of propodium, Zhonghua Zheng Xing Wai Ke Za Zhi 29 (2013) 258–260.

[7] L.R. Zhou, J. Li, W. Wang, Microsurgical repair of skin-degloving injury of whole hand or foot, Zhongguo Xiu Fu Chong Jian Wai Ke Za Zhi 17 (2003) 321–323.

4

