Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100347

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Trauma Case Reports

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/tcr

Case Report
Osteosynthesis of fractures after elbow ankylosis treated with an
Ilizarov external ring ﬁxator: A case report
Yohei Yanagisawa⁎, Tokio Kawamura, Shunsuke Asakawa, Masashi Yamazaki

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennodai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Ilizarov external ring ﬁxator
Olecranon fracture
External ﬁxation
Ankylosed elbow
Osteosynthesis

Treatment with an Ilizarov ring external ﬁxator is less invasive of soft tissues than is open re-
duction and internal ﬁxation (ORIF) surgery. Operative treatment of fractures with an Ilizarov
ring external ﬁxator after elbow ankylosis has not been reported. We describe our experience
with this surgical treatment (i.e., placement of an Ilizarov external ring ﬁxator) for a fracture that
occurred after elbow ankylosis. A 63-year-old Japanese woman fell from standing height onto her
left elbow. A transverse fracture was observed at the ankylosed site and the patient underwent
surgery 8 days after the injury. The surgery was performed in the prone position under general
anesthesia. Four months postoperatively, the fracture showed bone union and the ﬁxator was
removed. At the 1-year follow-up, she had no pain and no nerve palsy, can could perform the
same activities as before the injury. Thus, treatment with an Ilizarov ring external ﬁxator for a
fracture around the elbow joint is a minimally invasive procedure that aﬀords ﬁrm ﬁxation and
achieves fracture-site compression. Osteosynthesis of fractures after elbow ankylosis treated with
an Ilizarov external ring ﬁxator has not been reported previously. This technique was less in-
vasive to the soft tissues and was considered to be a good surgical treatment to achieve osteo-
synthesis of fractures after elbow ankylosis.

Introduction

Treatment with an Ilizarov ring external ﬁxator is less invasive of soft tissues than is open reduction and internal ﬁxation (ORIF)
surgery. The ﬁxation stiﬀness can be modiﬁed during the course of the treatment to enable proper manipulation of the healing
process [1]. Hence, external ﬁxation oﬀers various advantages compared with ORIF. It is a minimally invasive technique, the ap-
plication of which is a valuable tool in the management of some cases of fracture and other complicated musculoskeletal conditions
[1]. Operative treatment of fractures with an Ilizarov ring external ﬁxator after elbow ankylosis has not been reported previously.

We describe our experience with the placement of an Ilizarov external ring ﬁxator to treat a fracture after elbow ankylosis.

Case presentation

The patient was a 63-year-old Japanese woman who had sustained a fracture around the elbow joint 51 years prior to pre-
sentation (when she was 12 years old). After operative treatment of this fracture, the elbow joint developed bony ankylosis. The
medical records of that event had been discarded, and her and her parents' memories were ambiguous regarding the causes of
ankylosis.

⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: Yanagisawa@md.tsukuba.ac.jp (Y. Yanagisawa).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcr.2020.100347
Accepted 27 July 2020
Available online 29 July 2020
2352-6440/ © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).

Y. Yanagisawa, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100347

Fig. 1. AP and lateral X-ray of the left elbow, sagittal CT images.

Regarding the current event, the patient fell from a standing height onto her left elbow. She was neurovascularly intact on
examination, with pain at the elbow, and visited an orthopedic clinic. The diagnosis was a fracture and her left arm was braced. She
was then referred to our hospital, which she visited on the day after the injury. Radiography and computed tomography (CT) revealed
complete ankylosis of the humeroulnar joint and arthritic changes in the radiohumeral joint. A transverse fracture was observed at
the ankylosed site (Fig. 1, X-ray and CT). Moreover, the patient exhibited strong swelling around the elbow joint, and several blisters
formed on the dorsal side. She was waiting for surgery with splinting. The patient had a scar inside the elbow, which was suspected to
result from the previous surgical wound. We decided that ORIF was diﬃcult because the soft tissue part was thin and poorly
extensible; thus, we opted for treatment with a ring-type external ﬁxator.

The patient underwent surgery 8 days after the injury. The surgery was performed in the prone position under general anesthesia.
Four TrueLok (Orthoﬁx, Lewisville, Texas) rings were used (130 mm, 5/8 semi-circular rings). Olive-stopped (1.8 mm) K-wires
(Orthoﬁx, Lewisville, Texas) were inserted percutaneously through the humerus, from the lateral to the medial side, otherwise
through the ulna, from the ulnar (medial) to the radial (lateral) side, and ﬁxed after tensioning to 80 Nm. The two half pins were
inserted in the humerus on orthogonal surfaces, and one half pin was inserted in the ulna. Four Rapid Adjust Struts (Orthoﬁx,
Lewisville, Texas) were installed across the fracture site. These struts were installed in the direction perpendicular to the fracture
surface (Figs. 2 and 3).

Posterior interosseous nerve palsy occurred after surgery. The paralysis resolved naturally 2 weeks after surgery. One week after
the surgery, the fracture site was compressed three times using the Rapid Adjust Struts, by 1 mm each time. Four months post-
operatively, the fracture showed bone union and the ﬁxator was removed (Fig. 4). At the 1-year follow-up, the patient had no pain

Fig. 2. Postoperative X-ray.

2

Y. Yanagisawa, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100347

Fig. 3. (A) Postoperative view of the left arm and the Ilizarov ring external ﬁxator.
(B) Schematic representation of the Ilizarov ring external ﬁxator.

Fig. 4. The ﬁxator was removed and bone union was observed 4 months after surgery.

and no nerve palsy and was able to perform the same activities as before the injury.

Discussion

Total elbow replacement (TER) has been reported as a surgical treatment for elbow ankylosis [2–4]. According to Peden [2], the
postoperative complication rate of post-traumatic elbow ankylosis is as high as 25%. Initially, there were no reports of primary TER to
treat a fracture after elbow ankylosis. Subsequently, 15 years [3], 16 years [2], and 31 years [4] have been reported as the time since

3

Y. Yanagisawa, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100347

the initial trauma, because of elbow ankylosis after TER. In the current case, 51 years had elapsed since the initial trauma because of
elbow ankylosis. Furthermore, the thinning of the soft tissue, especially on the elbow extension side, was remarkable, and blisters had
formed at the same site. Therefore, TER was not selected because it is invasive and soft tissue complications were considered likely to
occur at this time.

There are few reports on the internal ﬁxation of fractures of the elbow after ankylosis. Two previous cases were treated with an IP-
XS nail which with minimal invasiveness to soft tissues, without complications [5]. Patients with an external ﬁxator may experience
mild discomfort, whereas patients treated with ORIF do not feel discomfort from the implants. Our study has a limitation in that we
could not obtain any patient-reported outcomes. This is an important consideration when choosing treatment using the external
ﬁxator.

Strong ﬁxation is necessary for transverse fractures located at the shaft of long bones. In the present case, the humerus and
forearm were fused, and the fracture occurred at the ankylosed site, which is similar to a transverse fracture at the shaft of a long
bone. In this case, the fracture site was not expanded, and compression was applied at the fracture site using an Ilizarov ring external
ﬁxator, to achieve bone union. Although it is a mechanical test in arthrodesis, it has been reported that the Ilizarov ring external
ﬁxator is superior to headless screw ﬁxation regarding compression force of the ﬁxation part [6]. In addition, it has been reported that
the external ﬁxation force was eﬀective for arthrodesis ﬁxation of the knee joint [7]. External ﬁxation is an alternate method for
achieving fracture-site compression and has the advantage of allowing postoperative compression adjustment when necessary.

Treatment with an Ilizarov ring external ﬁxator for a fracture located around the elbow joint is a minimally invasive technique
that aﬀords ﬁrm ﬁxation and achieves fracture-site compression; therefore, good clinical outcomes have been reported for surgery on
fractures of the distal humerus in elderly patients [8] and periprosthetic humeral shaft fracture after TER in an osteoporotic patient
[9]. Osteosynthesis of fractures after elbow ankylosis treated with an Ilizarov external ring ﬁxator has not been reported previously.
This technique is less invasive to the soft tissues and is considered to be a good surgical treatment for osteosynthesis of fractures after
elbow ankylosis.

Funding

No funds were obtained for doing this research.

Ethical statement

The case was fully compliant with the ethical standards of medical case report. Institutional Review Board (IRB) approval was not

required.

Patient consent

Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors have no conﬂicts of interest.

References

[1] H. Andruszkow, R. Pfeifer, K. Horst, F. Hildebrand, H.C. Pape, External ﬁxation in the elderly, Injury 46 (2015) S7–12.
[2] J.P. Peden, B.F. Morrey, Total elbow replacement for the management of the ankylosed or fused elbow, Bone. Jt. Surg. Ser. B 90 (2008) 1198–1204.
[3] R. D’Ambrosi, F. Formiconi, N. Ursino, M. Rubino, Treatment of complete ankylosed elbow with total arthroplasty, BMJ Case Rep. 12 (2019) 1–7.
[4] D. Rog, L.M. Zuckerman, B. Riedel, Conversion of a surgical elbow arthrodesis to total elbow arthroplasty, Case Rep. Orthop. 2015 (578) (2015) 189.
[5] J. Gehr, W. Friedl, Weichteilschonende stabile Versorgung nach Fraktur bei ellbogenankylose: Zwei fallberichte, Unfallchirurg 108 (2005) 998–1000.
[6] L.D. Latt, R.R. Glisson, S.B. Adams, R. Schuh, J.A. Narron, M.E. Easley, Biomechanical comparison of external ﬁxation and compression screws for transverse

tarsal joint arthrodesis, Foot Ankle Int. 36 (2015) 1235–1242.

[7] M. Waszczykowski, K. Niedzielski, M. Radek, J. Fabis, Arthroscopic-assisted arthrodesis of the knee joint with the ilizarov technique a case report and literature

review, Med. (United States) 95 (2016) 1–6.

[8] A. Burg, M. Berenstein, J. Engel, et al., Fractures of the distal humerus in elderly patients treated with a ring ﬁxator, Int. Orthop. 35 (2011) 101–106.
[9] Y. Yanagisawa, Y. Hara, D. Nozawa, M. Yamazaki, Treatment of periprosthetic humeral shaft fracture after total elbow arthroplasty in an osteoporotic patient,

using the Ilizarov external ring ﬁxator: a case report, J. Orthop. Case Rep. 8 (2018) 82–85.

4

