Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100351

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Trauma Case Reports

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/tcr

Case Report
Pseudo-aneurysm of the lateral circumﬂex femoral artery after
femoral neck fracture – A case report
Patrick Carroll⁎, Robert Flavin

Department of Trauma & Orthopedic Surgery, St. Vincent's, University Hospital, Elm Park, Dublin 4 D04 YN63, Ireland

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Orthopedic surgery
Trauma
Hip fracture
Pseudo-aneurysm
Vascular surgery
Radiology

Introduction

Only one case of injury of the lateral circumﬂex femoral artery secondary to a femoral neck
fracture has been reported. We present a second case of this rare injury.

A 59-year-old gentleman fell from an embankment, from approximately two meters in height,
while landscaping and landed onto his left side. He suﬀered immediate pain in his left hip and
was unable to weight bear. X-ray demonstrated a Garden II left femoral neck fracture. Within 24
of the injury, he underwent percutaneous internal ﬁxation of his left hip using partially threaded
cannulated screws.

Two days post operatively, the patient described pain in his groin. X-ray was satisfactory and
the pain was attributed to the fracture and subsequent surgery. However, this pain persisted,
worsened and warranted further investigation. A doppler ultrasound, followed by a CT angio-
gram, conﬁrmed a pseudoaneurysm of the lateral circumﬂex femoral artery which was treated
with embolisation by the vascular surgery service. This relieved the patient's discomfort im-
mediately.

This is the second reported case of pseudo-aneurysm of the lateral circumﬂex femoral artery

secondary to a femoral neck fracture.

Vascular injury as a result of a hip fracture and subsequent internal ﬁxation is a rare event [1]. Vascular injury during the course

of internal ﬁxation in proximal femoral fractures can be potentially limb and life threatening [2[1]].

It is of utmost importance to recognize a vascular injury if one is present. A careful history and physical examination pre- and
post-operatively is critical to help recognize this rare event. Physical signs of a vascular injury can be negative despite having a
vascular injury and therefore having a low threshold for diagnostic imaging is important if there is a suspicion of such an injury being
present. This is as important post-operatively as pre-operatively. This case report highlights the importance of taking a thorough
history from the patient post-operatively and the importance of acting on any suspicion of a vascular injury with further imaging.
The blood supply of the femoral neck is from the profunda femoris artery, the obturator artery and the superior and inferior
gluteal arteries [3]. The medial femoral circumﬂex artery is the maior blood supply to the adult femoral head a major contributor to
the extracapsular ring/anastomosis. The lateral circumﬂex femoral artery (LCFA) has a less signiﬁcant blood supply to the adult
femoral head but is also a major contributor to the extracapsular ring/anastomosis (Fig. 1). Kakarala et al. [1] described the only
known LCFA injury secondary to an undisplaced hip fracture. The region of injury in their case report and this case report is at the
infero-medial aspect of the femoral neck [1].

⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: patrickcarroll@rcsi.com (P. Carroll).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcr.2020.100351
Accepted 7 August 2020
Available online 11 August 2020
2352-6440/ © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).

P. Carroll and R. Flavin

Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100351

Fig. 1. Illustration of the anatomy of the femoral neck including the lateral circumﬂex femoral artery which was damaged at the time of in-
tracapsular neck fracture.

A pseudo-aneurysm of the LCFA secondary to a femoral neck fracture has been reported three times in the literature, with
iatrogenic causes identiﬁed in two of those cases [4–7]. We report a second case of pseudo-aneurysm of the LCFA secondary to a
femoral neck fracture.

Case presentation

A 59-year-old gentleman fell from an embankment, approximately 2 m in height, while landscaping and landed onto his left side.

He was brought to the hospital by ambulance and diagnosed with a Garden Stage II femoral neck fracture [8] (Fig. 2 A and B).

He has a background history of non-insulin dependant diabetes mellitus, increased body mass index, obstructive sleep apnoea and

a myocardial infarction treated medically in 1992.

On admission to hospital, he was neurovascularly intact. He was managed according to the NICE guidelines for hip fracture
management [9]. His pre-operative Haemoglobin was 13.2 g/dl. The patient underwent percutaneous internal ﬁxation within 24 h of
admission to the hospital.

Intra-operatively, the patient was carefully placed on a traction table. The fracture was undisplaced and therefore percutaneous
ﬁxation was performed using two partially threaded cannulated stainless steel 8 mm screws and one 6.5 mm screw (ASNIS III,
Stryker, Michigan, United States of America). Of note, once the guidewire entered the lateral femoral cortex, it stayed within bone
throughout the procedure, as each wire was only inserted once.

Post-operatively, the patient described continued pain of his left hip. Clinically, no abnormality was detected in his hip and thigh

Fig. 2. A - Pre-operative antero-posterior pelvis x-ray demonstrating a left Garden II intracapsular hip fracture.
B - A horizontal beam lateral x-ray demonstrating a left Garden II intracapsular hip fracture.

2

P. Carroll and R. Flavin

Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100351

Fig. 3. A - Post-operative antero-posterior pelvis x-ray demonstrating internal ﬁxation of an intracapsular hip fracture with partially threaded
cannulated screws.
B - Post-operative lateral beam x-ray demonstrating internal ﬁxation of an intracapsular hip fracture with partially threaded cannulated screws.

region and he was neurovascularly intact. Departmental x-rays were performed which showed satisfactory position of the fracture
and screws (Figs. 3 A and B). Despite analgesia, his pain did not dissipate over the following days. One week post operatively, he
complained of increasing severe left hip pain radiating to his groin. Routine bloods were taken, and he was re-imaged. His hae-
moglobin was 12.0 g/dl on day two post operatively and was now 10.2 g/dl. Although he was neurovascularly intact and clinically
his thigh was not enlarged compared to the contralateral limb, the persistent pain and the drop in haemoglobin raised a suspicion of
bleeding.

Further imaging was performed to look for any local bleeding at the site of injury. A duplex ultrasound scan diagnosed a
pseudoaneurysm measuring 6.1 cm, which was conﬁrmed with CT angiography (Fig. 4 A and B). The vascular surgery department
were consulted and performed embolisation of the LCFA using an intravascular coil (Fig. 5 A and B).

The patient's pain completely resolved almost immediately after embolisation. He has done extremely well post operatively.
5 years since his injury he is asymptomatic, continues to work in landscaping and radiographically he has no evidence of avascular
necrosis of the femoral head.

Discussion

The incidence of serious vascular injury at the time of hip fracture is extremely rare. It is quoted to occur in only 0.21% of
proximal femoral fractures [1]. Although there are many cases of vascular injury in proximal femoral fractures reported, very few are
of the LCFA [4]. Only three cases after femoral neck fracture have reported a pseudoaneurysm of the LCFA. Only one case has
reported the pseudoaneurysm to be attributable to the fracture [4].

The ﬁrst case of a pseudoaneurysm in the LCFA secondary to the femoral neck fracture was reported in 2006 [5]. This case is
similar to our own in presentation. An elderly male of 75 years suﬀered a low injury fall and a neck of femur fracture treated with
cannulated screws. Pre, peri and in the immediate post-operative period this patient did well. In fact, this patient was discharged on
day six, only to return to hospital one week later. He presented with a swollen thigh and fainting episodes. His Hb had dropped to
7.3 g/dl from 13.2 g/dl pre-operatively. The diagnosis was made, and he was embolized using an intravascular coil.

Fig. 4. A - A doppler ultrasound still image which demonstrates a pseudoaneurysm of the lateral circumﬂex femoral artery.
B - CT Angiogram which demonstrates a pseudoaneurysm of the lateral circumﬂex femoral artery.

3

P. Carroll and R. Flavin

Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100351

Fig. 5. A - Pre-embolisation image under ﬂuoroscopy of the lateral circumﬂex femoral artery.
B - Post-embolisation image under ﬂuoroscopy of the lateral circumﬂex femoral artery after coiled embolisation.

The second and third cases were reported as iatrogenic injury to the LCFA [6,7]. In the second case an 86-year-old woman
suﬀered an undisplaced subcapital pseudo-aneurysm and the pre-peri and immediate post-operative periods went successfully
without complication. However, the patient collapsed and was unable to lift her leg on day nine post operatively. Immediate work up
was done for a pulmonary embolus and deep vein thrombosis. A pseudoaneurysm due to injury to the LCFA was identiﬁed and treated
with embolization using three vascular occlusion coils. Due to the site of the bleeding and the fact that the sharp tip of a guidewire
had been used as a ‘version’ wire during surgery, it was suspected that this injury was iatrogenic in nature.

The third case involved a 70-year-old woman who had an unwitnessed fall at home. Again, the pre, peri and immediate post-
operative period went well. This patient was discharged at day six post-operatively. On the eighth day post-operatively, this patient
re-presented to the hospital due to excruciating pain. She was subsequently diagnosed with anterior thigh compartment syndrome
secondary to a pseudoaneurysm in the LCFA and underwent haematoma evacuation and open ligation of the vessel. This patient did
well after this event.

We have described the second case of pseudoaneurysm of the LFCA after femoral neck fracture in the literature. Unfortunately,
the classic signs of vascular injury such as pulse deﬁcit, bruit, arterial bleeding and expanding or pulsatile haematoma may be absent
despite signiﬁcant injury to the vessel wall [4]. A high index of suspicion for vascular injury is warranted when post-operative pain is
not explained, worsening and there is a drop in haemoglobin. A standard pain score chart for all post-operative hip fracture patients
has been recommended and we believe it should be routinely performed and any outlier should be reviewed by a senior physician to
identify a cause [6]. A low threshold for higher order imaging is required when a pseudoaneurysm is suspected with CT angiogram
being the deﬁnitive imaging of arterial trauma [10].

Conclusions

We have described the second case of a pseudoaneurysm of the LCFA secondary to hip fracture in the literature. Surgeons need to
have a cautious approach to the patient's post-operative rehabilitation and discharge. It is imperative for the surgeon to clinically
assess the patient post-operatively and have a low threshold to investigate any abnormal symptoms or signs. Surgeons and physicians
should be aware of the possibility of pseudoaneurysm of the LFCA after hip fracture when a patient complains of unexplained pain
and should investigate promptly and treat accordingly.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Patrick Carroll: Investigation, Writing – Original draft preparation, Robert Flavin: Conceptualisation, Writing – Review & Editing,

Supervision.

Acknowledgements

Jacob C Mandell, M.D., Assistant Professor of Radiology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 75 Francis Street, Boston MA 02115.

USA. Dr. Mandell kindly supplied the illustration of the blood supply of the femoral neck used for Fig. 1.

4

P. Carroll and R. Flavin

References

Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100351

[1] I. Karanikas, M. Lazarides, D. Arvanitis, G. Papayanopoulos, E. Exarchou, J. Dayantas, Iatrogenic arterial trauma associated with hip fracture surgery, Acta Chir.

Belg. 93 (6) (1993) 284–286.

[2] J. Bartonícek, Poranení femoralních cev u trochanterickych zlomenin injuries to femoral vessels after fracture of the hip, Rozhl. Chir. 88 (4) (2009) 203–205.
[3] J.C. Thompson, Netter’s Concise Orthopaedic Anatomy, 2nd ed., Saunders Elsevier, Philadelphia, 2009.
[4] A. Barquet, A. Gelink, P. Giannoudis, Proximal femoral fractures and vascular injuries in adults: incidence, aetiology and outcomes, Injury 46 (12) (2015) (2297-

[5] G.K. Kakarala, L. Van Rensburg, M. Parker, Pseudo-aneurysm of the lateral circumﬂex femoral artery, Eur J Trauma 32 (5) (2006) 480–481.
[6] K. Davda, T.C. Pollard, A.J. Graham, Delayed presentation of lateral femoral circumﬂex artery injury post cannulated hip screw surgery – a case report, Ann. R.

2213).

Coll. Surg. Engl. 91 (2009) W3–W5.

[7] Kantak, Traumatic pseudoaneurysm of the lateral circumﬂex femoral artery presenting as anterior thigh compartment syndrome: a rare complication of in-

tracapsular hip fracture ﬁxation, J Med Cases 8 (7) (2017) 211–214.

[8] R.S. Garden, Low-angle ﬁxation in fractures of the femoral neck, J Bone Joint Surg Br 43 (4) (1961) 647–663.
[9] National Clinical Guideline Centre, The Management of hip fracture in adults, National Clinical Guideline Centre, London, 2011.
[10] P.D. Peng, D.A. Spain, M. Tataria, J.C. Hellinger, G.D. Rubin, S.I. Brundage, CT angiography eﬀectively evaluates ex- tremity vascular trauma, Am. Surg. 74 (2)

(2008) 103–107.

5

