Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100336

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Trauma Case Reports

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/tcr

Case Report
Pseudoparalytic shoulder in a CoViD-19-positive patient treated
with CPAP: A case report
Matteo Vitalia, Giulia Bettinellib, Damiano Salvatob, Delmastro Elenab,⁎,
Vincenzo Salinib
a San Raﬀaele Hospital, Orthopaedic Department, Milan, Italy
b Vita-Salute San Raﬀaele University, Milan, Italy

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Covid
CPAP
Axillary nerve
Pseudoparalytic shoulder

Introduction

The Authors report a case of a 46 years old man aﬀected by severe acute respiratory syndrome
caused by Novel Coronavirus 2019 and admitted to our hospital. The patient required continuous
positive airway pressure therapy (CPAP) in the hospital ward and subsequently orotracheal in-
tubation while in intensive care unit. The patient laid in lateral decubitus position for several
hours every day while receiving CPAP therapy. During the hospitalization, he reported limitation
of range of motion of the left upper limb, without any history of acute or previous trauma. The
clinical appearance of the arm was suggestive of pseudoparalytic shoulder.

This case emphasizes the importance of proper body positioning during invasive and non-
invasive mechanical ventilation in order to prevent peripheral nerve compression and further
disability.

Coronavirus Disease 2019 (CoViD-19) is an infectious disease caused by Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome-CoronaVirus-2
(SARS-CoV-2), an extremely contagious pathogen. As CoViD-19 rapidly spread around the globe during the ﬁrst months of 2020, the
WHO has declared the CoViD-19 a pandemic [1].

Italy was the ﬁrst European country to register a CoViD-19 epidemic; to date — April 15, 2020, the number of total CoViD-19

Italian cases is 162,488, with 21,067 deaths [2].

Approximately 15% of individuals with CoViD-19 develop moderate to severe pneumonia requiring hospitalization and oxygen
support. In addition, 5% of the patients require admission to an Intensive Care Unit and invasive therapies such as Orotracheal
Intubation (OTI) and mechanical ventilation [3].

A resolutive therapy for CoViD is unfortunately still unavailable. The pharmacological support given to CoViD patients includes
antiviral agents, antibiotics, hydroxychloroquine and steroids when needed, but the most eﬀective treatment, and currently the only
one proven to ameliorate the patient's condition is oxygen supply. Respiratory support has diﬀerent levels of invasiveness, from the
least to greatest: high ﬂow nasal cannula, Venturi mask, Continuous Positive Airways Pressure (CPAP), and eventually Orotracheal
Intubation [4]. In patients with severe respiratory impairment, oxygen therapy is administered for many hours for many consecutive
days. To enhance respiratory kinematics, patients in Intensive Care Unit (ICU) sometimes require to maintain a prone position while
intubated [5]. The same principle is sometimes applied during CPAP therapy. Prone positioning has been used for many years to

⁎ Corresponding author at: Vita-Salute San Raﬀaele University, Via Olgettina 58, 20132 Milano, Italy.
E-mail address: delmastro.elena@gmail.com (D. Elena).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcr.2020.100336
Accepted 27 July 2020
Available online 29 July 2020
2352-6440/ © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).

M. Vitali, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100336

improve oxygenation: lung inﬂation is more homogeneous from dorsal to ventral than in the supine position, with more homo-
geneously distributed stress and strain. As blood perfusion of the lungs remains the same in both supine and prone postures, pro-
nation usually improves oxygenation [6].

Caution must be taken when proning patients: pressure applied to speciﬁc body regions for prolonged time might cause lesions
such as bedsores or nerve injuries [7]. Axillary nerve palsy is a neurological condition in which the axillary nerve has been damaged
by a traumatic or compressive injury. A rare cause of axillary nerve palsy is lying in lateral position for several hours. Such condition
has been documented after a prolonged labor on side-lying birthing position [8] or after sleeping for many hours in a lateral decubitus
position in a quadriplegic patient [9].

We report a case of axillary nerve palsy in a patient aﬀected by COVID-19 who kept a wrong decubitus position while receiving

CPAP therapy.

Case report

We report a case of a 46 yo Caucasian male who was admitted to the Emergency Room (ER) of San Raﬀaele hospital, Milan, on
March 9th, 2020, while Italy was facing the healthcare emergency of CoViD-19 pandemic. The patient had a history of 2-day high
fever and shortness of breath. Physical examination revealed an alert and oriented man with shortness of breath. Vital signs collected
at the time of admission were: body temperature 38 °C, blood pressure (BP) 130/80 mmHg, heart rate (HR) 100 beats per minute,
respiratory rate (RR) 30 breaths per minute; oxygen saturation was 95% on room air. Past medical history was positive for type 2
diabetes.

Chest X-ray, blood tests, Arterial Blood Gas (ABG) assay and an oropharyngeal swab were immediately performed in the ER: as
soon as the results were available, the diagnosis of CoViD was made and the patient was admitted to the internal medicine unit of the
facility.

The patient spent 7 days in the aforementioned unit, where hydroxychloroquine 200 mg b.i.d. and lopinavir/ritonavir 200/50 mg
b.i.d were administered, associated with ceftriaxone 2 g once a day and azithromycin 500 mg once a day; later it became necessary to
suspend hydroxychloroquine for QT interval prolongation. He started Tocilizumab treatment on March 16th, 2020. Continuous
Positive Airway Pressure Therapy was started on the 4th day after admission due to the low values of blood oxygen saturation and it
was carried out from March 13th to March 17th, 2020. The patient received CPAP four times a day for 3 h each time, alternating with
Venturi oxygen mask with 60% FiO2 oxygen ﬂow. As recent ﬁndings suggest prone decubitus ameliorates blood gas exchanges during
Mechanical Ventilation and Non Invasive Ventilation, it was asked the patient to keep this body position. As during CPAP the patient
was uncomfortable keeping a prone decubitus, he laid sideways instead, always on the left side, with his left arm adducted.

Due to deterioration of respiratory mechanics and hypoxia despite high ﬂow oxygen therapy, he underwent oro-tracheal in-
tubation and was admitted to Intensive Care Unit on March 17, 2020. He stayed in ICU for 12 days. While sedated and mechanically
ventilated, he underwent 5 cycles of prone-supine positioning with progressive improvement of vitals, especially blood oxygenation.
On March 29, 2020 he was discharged from the ICU and readmitted to the general medicine ward. As soon as the patient was able
to stand up and return to normal daily activities, he complained of impairment of abduction and elevation of the left upper limb. He
denied any previous history of trauma.

An orthopaedic consult was asked to the surgeon on duty on April 3, 2020. On physical examination, Range of Motion (ROM) of
the left shoulder was limited compared to the contralateral one. The right shoulder ROM was complete, while left shoulder abduction

Picture 1. Patient's left arm maximum abduction.

2

M. Vitali, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100336

Picture 2. Patient's left arm maximum extension.

and extension were limited to 45° each; in addition, he used his scapula-thorax joint to compensate for the deﬁcit (Pictures 1 and 2).
The clinical appearance was suggestive of pseudoparalytic shoulder. A neurological consult was required as well; it reported a left
deltoid muscle hyposthenia of ¾ on the Medical Research Council (MRC) scale, without sensitivity disturbances.

He was treated with a cycle of passive physical therapy, which started on the day after the diagnosis. As prescribed, the future
diagnostic-therapeutic process includes daily physiotherapy and an Electromyography to be performed 30 days after the onset of
symptoms [10]. The diagnostic hypothesis is an axillary nerve palsy due to prolonged lateral positioning.

Conclusions

The main and most eﬀective therapy for CoViD patients is respiratory support, whether with nasal cannulae, Venturi mask, CPAP
or mechanical ventilation. Patients requiring hospitalization for breathing support often keep prolonged ﬁxed positions (prone po-
sition/lateral decubitus) during CPAP/mechanical ventilation treatment for many hours; for this reason special attention must be
paid to proper body positioning of the patients.

This clinical case highlights an uncommon and not previously reported side eﬀect that might occur while keeping the lateral
decubitus for a long time during CPAP. Healthcare workers have to be aware of this possible complication and must implement
proper precautions to prevent it. In order to avoid pseudoparalytic shoulders caused by axillary nerve compression, it's important to
change the side of the lateral decubitus and to abduct the arm of the patients during CPAP sessions.

References

[1] S.A. Harari, M. Vitacca, F. Blasi, The Italian Thoracic Society (AIPO-ITS), Italian Respirarory Society (SIP/IRS), et al., Managing the respiratory care of patients

with COVID-19, Version-March 08, 2020. http://www.aiponet.it.

[2] Protezione civile oﬃcial website, http://www.protezionecivile.gov.it.
[3] World Health Organisation, Clinical Management of Severe Acute Respiratory Infection (SARI) when COVID-19 Disease is Suspected-Interim Guidance, WHO, 13

March 2020.

[4] M. Sorbello, K. El-Boghdadly, I. Di Giacinto, et al., The Italian coronavirus disease 2019 outbreak: recommendations from clinical practice, Anaesthesia 75

(2020) 727–729 (Mar 27).

[5] C. Guérin, J. Reignier, J.C. Richard, PROSEVA Study Group, et al., Prone positioning in severe acute respiratory distress syndrome, N. Engl. J. Med. 368 (2013)

2159–2168.

[6] L. Gattinoni, P. Taccone, E. Carlesso, et al., Prone position in acute respiratory distress syndrome. Rationale, indications, and limits, Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care

Med. 188 (11) (2013) 1286–1293 Dec 1.

[7] P.E. Jové, M.A. Villarrasa, C.D. Ortiz, Analysis of complications of prone position in acute respiratory distress syndrome: quality standard, incidence and related

factors, Enferm Intensiva 28 (3) (2017) 125–134 Jul-Sep.

[8] Nozomi Ouchi, Suzuki, et al., Lateral axillary nerve palsy as a complication of labor, J. Matern. Fetal Neonatal Med. 21 (3) (2008) 217–218.
[9] W.A. Adair, G. Schwartz, Acquired isolated axillary neuropathy: an unusual complication of quadriplegia, Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 66 (10) (1985) 713–716

Oct.

[10] E.R. Bergquist, W.C. Hammert, Timing and appropriate use of electrodiagnostic studies, Hand Clin. 29 (3) (2013) 363–370. Aug.

3

