Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100343

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Trauma Case Reports

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/tcr

Case Report
Superior approach for treating Ideberg III glenoid fractures with
superior shoulder suspensory complex injury: A technical trick☆
JinLong Zhenga,1, Nan Lub,1, Zhuimeng Shena, AiMin Chenb,⁎
a Orthopedic Department of The Cilin Hospital, No 599, Shiji Road, Guanhaiwei Town, Cixi City, Zhe Jiang Province 315300, People's Republic of
China
b Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Chang Zheng Hospital, The Second Military Medical University, No 415, Fengyang Road, Huangpu District,
Shanghai 200003, People's Republic of China

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Superior approach
Glenoid fracture
Superior shoulder suspensory complex
Fixation

Ideberg III glenoid fractures are rare and difficult in treating among shoulder fractures. With the
development of research, a series of surgical approaches and methods were performed, such as
anterior approach, traditional Judet approach, modified Judet approach, combined approach,
acromion approach and so on. While these approaches still have some limitations in treatment of
Ideberg III glenoid fractures with superior shoulder suspensory complex(SSSC) injury, for ex-
tensive soft tissue dissection, unsatisfactory exposure, difficult surgical intervention. In our case
with Ideberg III glenoid fracture with acromioclavicular dislocation, superior approach was
adopted during treatment of the scapula glenoid fracture and coracoclavicular ligament rupture
perfectly. The result was satisfactory in accordance with 92 points by Constant-Murley score. We
believe that individualized therapy should depend on the injury types, and superior approach
would be a new valuable method for Ideberg III glenoid fractures with SSSC injury.

Introduction

Scapula glenoid fractures are mostly associated with high-energy injuries, accounting for about 1.0% of total body fractures and
10% of shoulder fractures [1]. Some scholars still advocated conservative treatment for glenoid fractures [2,3], but more and more
studies found that conservative treatment most probably resulted in various complications such as shoulder pain, instability, dys-
function and traumatic arthritis etc. Therefore, surgical treatments were accepted gradually, especially to the displaced Ideberg III
glenoid fractures or with superior shoulder suspensory complex(SSSC) injury [4,5]. In consideration of the complexity of Ideberg III
glenoid fractures, there were still controversial about surgical methods including surgical approach, fixed position and internal
fixation device. We treated a Ideberg III glenoid fracture with SSSC injury by superior approach, which has not been reported in the
literature. Hereby, this paper mainly introduces the characteristics of the superior approach and the technical trick, for providing a
new valuable method for Ideberg III glenoid fracture with SSSC injury.

☆ No potential conflict of interest declared.
The patient gave informed consent and the Ethical Committee of the Second Military Medical University approved this study.
⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: aiminchen@aliyun.com (A. Chen).
1 Contributed equally to this work.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcr.2020.100343
Accepted 27 July 2020
Available online 01 August 2020
2352-6440/ © 2020 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).

J. Zheng, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100343

Fig. 1. preoperative appearance and anteroposterior radiographs of the right shoulder joint. It showed obviously glenoid fracture, coracoid process
displacement with acromioclavicular dislocation, and an ambiguous fracture line in upper scapula.

Case description

The patient, a middle-aged male, was admitted to the orthopedic department because of a motorcycle crash to his right shoulder.
He complained of right shoulder pain (mainly in superior shoulder area), refusing to move the wounded shoulder. The injury
consisted of features of the anterolateral skin scratch in right shoulder, the apophysis in distal clavicle higher than the acromion
process with a step-shaped deformity and floating movement, perishoulder swelling, obvious tenderness, with additional limited
shoulder movement. The orthopedic surgeon performed X-ray, CT examination and 3D reconstruction of the patient's shoulder.

Fig. 2. 3D CT reconstruction of the right shoulder joint. It clearly indicated that the fracture line of the glenoid process went through base of
coracoid process to the upper scapula, with coracoid displacement and acromioclavicular dislocation.

2

J. Zheng, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100343

Fig. 3. “L”was interpreted as a surgical approach from the medial acromion, passing the superior margin of the scapula, to the medial angle of
scapula, at about 8 cm in length.

Radiological images showed: the glenoid fracture, spreading to base of coracoid process and upper scapula, with acromioclavicular
dislocation (Figs. 1, 2). Diagnosis is glenoid fracture (Ideberg III) with acromioclavicular dislocation (Rockwood III).

Surgical technique

The patient was placed in healthy lateral position by general anesthesia. The straight incision (superior approach) was taken in
superior part of right shoulder (Fig. 3) from the medial acromion, passing the superior margin of the scapula, to the medial angle of
scapula, at about 8 cm in length. By separating bluntly and retracting gently the trapezius muscle, supraspinatus, acromion and
acromioclavicular joint were exposed. Then, we pulled the supraspinatus muscle forward to show superior glenoid, scapular notch
and supraspinatus fossa (window 1), and pulled the supraspinatus muscle backward to show superior margin of scapula, posterior
margin of distal clavicle, coracoid process and coracoclavicular ligament (window 2). Suprascapular vessel and suprascapular nerve
should be paid attention and protected carefully in case of vascular rupture leading to massive hemorrhage and nerve injury resulting
in postoperative neurological dis- function. The acromioclavicular joint and the distal clavicle were exposed by extending the incision
laterally.
The fracture line was from the scapula glenoid slantingly upwards through the base of coracoid process to the upper scapula, with
coracoclavicular ligament rupture at the origin of the coracoid process which was relatively fresh and mild contusion in the broken
end. First upper scapula and coracoid basilar fracture were reduced anatomically, and fixed with a Y-shaped plate. After that, through
intraoperative X-ray we found that the scapula glenoid was reduced satisfactorily, then fixed with kirschner wires temporarily. The
glenoid fracture was fixed with a 3.5 mm cannulated screw through the base of the coracoid process slantingly downwards and
backward into the scapular neck (Figs. 4, 5, 6). At last, the broken end of coracoclavicular ligament was repaired with tendon suture
by mattress suture, with additional reinforced suturing fixation by knitting suture by drilling in the coracoid process and penetrating
a tendon suture through the bone tunnel.

Outcome

A neutral suspension immobilization of right shoulder had been carried out for 2 weeks since operation, whereafter, continuous
passive motion (CPM) was performed. Then the patient received rehabilitative guidance at 6 weeks after operation, including psy-
chological intervention and active exercises such as stretching exercises and climbing the wall to improve muscle strength and

3

J. Zheng, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100343

Figs. 4/5/6. The intraoperative anteroposterior X-ray images of the right shoulder joint. It showed: process of reduction and fixation. Anatomic
reduction of upper scapula, the base of coracoid process, glenoid process and satisfactory position of the plate and screw. The acromioclavicular
joint was basically reduced, however coracoclavicular interval still was larger than the healthy side.

Figs. 4/5/6. (continued)

durability of the joint. He returned gradually to his normal activities at 8 weeks after operation (Fig. 7). Intraoperative radiographs
were taken, and followed by reexamination by X-ray at 1 day, 6 weeks, 8 weeks, 3 months, 4 months and 6 months after operation.
With follow-up for 4 months (Figs. 8, 9, 10, 11), shoulder functions were evaluated by the Constant-Murley scoring system [6] at last.
In this case, the activity range of wound shoulder was almost normal without obvious pain. The outcome of surgical treatment was
satisfactory in accordance with 92 points in total score. Right shoulder abduction, forward flexion and horizontal external rotation
were 145°, 150° and 55°, which were 20°, 10° and 15° less than the corresponding activity ranges in the contralateral shoulder
respectively.

4

J. Zheng, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100343

Figs. 4/5/6. (continued)

Fig. 7. Rehabilitative guidance at 6 weeks after operation, including psychological intervention and active exercises such as stretching exercise and
climbing the wall.

Discussion

There are many classification methods for scapula glenoid fractures, in which Ideberg classification [7] is most commonly used.
Ideberg et al. classified glenoid fractures into 6 types. Among them, Ideberg III glenoid fractures are characterized by a transverse

5

J. Zheng, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100343

Fig. 8. X-ray anteroposterior radiographs of the right shoulder joint on the first day after surgery showed satisfactory reduction of fractures and
positions of the plate and screw, and no significant change in the position of acromioclavicular joint compared with the previous one.

Fig. 9. X-ray anteroposterior and oblique radiographs of the right shoulder joint at 4 months after surgery showed satisfactory reduction and
positions of the plate and screw, fracture healing.

fracture line that separates the superior glenoid process, the base of coracoid process and the upper scapula, often accompanied with
SSSC injuries. Research has shown that displaced Ideberg III glenoid fractures or with SSSC injury should require surgical treatment
[4,5].
It is particularly important to choose an appropriate surgical approach because of the complexity of Ideberg III glenoid fractures.
Currently, there are several known surgical approaches as follows: anterior approach [5,8,9], posterior approach (traditional Judet
approach and modified Judet approach) [10–12], combined approach [13] and acromion approach [14]. A posterior superior ap-
proach, posterior vertical approach and posterior minimally invasive approach [15] mentioned by a few literatures, actually, all
should belong to the category of modified Judet approach. The anterior approach is the most common method for the Ideberg III
fracture due to the satisfactory exposure to the intra and extra articular components, incision of which starts from the midpoint
between coracoid tip and acromioclavicular joint, and goes down along the anterior edge of axillary furrow. However, the dis-
advantages of this approach are the extensive soft tissue dissection and unsatisfactory exposure to fractures around the scapular notch
[16]. The incision of traditional Judet approach starts from posterior acromion and arcuates to inferior angle of the scapula along
scapular spine and medial margin of the scapula, and incision of modified Judet approach is based on the traditional Judet approach
for more accurate and targeted operation. The incision of posterior superior approach starts from posterior acromion and extends
along scapular spine to expose superior glenoid process and coracoid process base. The posterior vertical approach applies a vertical
incision from the posterior angle of acromion process to subscapular angle to expose the glenoid neck, glenoid process and the
surroundings of the shoulder joint. The posterior minimally invasive approach performs tiny incisions along the anatomical margin of

6

J. Zheng, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100343

Fig. 10. The appearance of the right shoulder joint at 4 months after surgery. The appearance was normal while drooping the arms, and the
abduction range of the wounded shoulder approximately returned to the normal level.

Fig. 11. The appearance of the right shoulder joint at 4 months after surgery. The appearance was normal while elevating or back-extending the
arms.

the scapula, centering on fracture sites, which has the advantages in less muscle dissection and trauma, and disadvantages in limited
exposure and difficult reduction and fixation of complex fracture. Combined approach, as the name implies, is made up of the
anterior approach and posterior approach, which has the advantage in easy exposure and disadvantages in large incision and ex-
tensive soft tissue dissection and damage. The incision of acromion approach is performed from the posterior acromion along the
middle or entire length of the scapular spine, which is suitable for treating fractures around the scapular notch or Ideberg III fractures
related to acromion fracture, but is still difficult to repair SSSC.
In this case, the superior approach was adopted, mainly considering the special fracture type—Ideberg III glenoid fracture with

7

J. Zheng, et al.

Trauma Case Reports 29 (2020) 100343

acromioclavicular dislocation. The purpose was to offer convenient and necessary conditions in surgical therapy of glenoid fracture,
coracoid basilar fracture, upper scapula fracture and coracoclavicular dislocation. There exist two windows with the supraspinatus
muscle as center, and windows 1 can be exposed by pulling the muscle forward, while windows 2 can be exposed by pulling it
backward. Although the presence of acromion brings some difficulties to the operation, its influence is limited.
Upper scapula fracture and coracoid basilar fracture were surgically treated to create a good bony base for the repairment of
coracoclavicular ligament. Meanwhile, the glenoid fracture was fixed because the glenoid fractures had caused damage to the ar-
ticular surface. As long as the glenoid fracture lead to the destruction of joint stability, surgical treatment should be actively carried
out to achieve good functional recovery [17]. In addition, because of the importance of soft-tissue ring in SSSC, the principle of
paying equal attention to the bone structure and ligament tissue should be adhered to in Ideberg III glenoid fractures. In consideration
of being relatively fresh and mild contusion in the broken end of coracoclavicular ligament, it was enough to repair the rupture with
tendon suture directly in this case. In recent years, the cognitions about treatment method of acromioclavicular dislocation have
change from the original rigid fixation (e.g., clavicular hook plate) to the elastic fixation retaining some motion of the acromio-
clavicular joint, because elastic fixation is more suitable for physiological reconstruction than rigid fixation with clavicular hook
plate. Furthermore, complications such as acromion impingement syndrome, joint pain may occur in rigid fixation with clavicular
hook plate [18]. Of course, the follow-up at 3 months after surgery revealed that there was still asymmetry in the shoulders, which
might be related to muscle weakness, and expected to be gradually improved through later functional exercises.
Conclusion

To the best of our knowledge, there are all kinds of approaches and treatment methods about Ideberg III glenoid fractures.
Nevertheless, we believe that individualized therapy should depend on the different injury types, and superior approach should be a
new valuable method for Ideberg III glenoid fractures with SSSC injury.
References

(2009) 1511–1519.
(2011) 3379–3389.
94 (7) (2012) 645–653.

(1998) 122.

[1] B.D. Owens, T.P. Goss, Surgical approaches for glenoid fractures [J], Tech. Should. Elbow Surg. 5 (2) (2004) 103.
[2] T. Gosens, B. Speigner, J. Minekus, Fracture of the scapular body functional outcome after conservative treatment, Shoulder Elbow Surg 18 (3) (2009) 443–448.
[3] M.D. Schofer, A.C. Sehrt, N. Timmesfeld, et al., Fractures of the scapula long-term results after conservative treatment, Arch. Orthop. Trauma Surg. 129 (I)
[4] L. Clifford, M.D. Jones, L. Debra, et al., Analysis of operative versus nonoperative treatment of displaced scapular fractures [J], Clin. Orthop. Relat. Res. 469 (12)
[5] J. Anavian, Surgical and functional outcomes after operative management of complex and displaced intra-articular glenoid fractures [J], J Bone Joint Surg (Am)
[6] C.R. Constant, A.H. Murley, A clinical method of functional assessment of the shoulder, Clin Orthop Relat Res (214) (1987) 160–164.
[7] R. Ideberg, S. Grevsten, S. Larsson, Epidemiology of scapular fractures: incidence and classification of 338 fractures, Acta Orthop. Scand. 66 (1995) 395–397.
[8] K.A. Mayo, S.K. Benirschke, J.W. Mast, Displaced fractures of the glenoid fossa; results of open reduction and internal fixation [J], Clin. Orthop. Relat. Res. (347)
[9] P.A. Cole, E.M. Gauger, L.K. Schroder, Management of scapular fractures [J], J Am Acad Orthop Surg 20 (3) (2012) 130–141.
[10] T.P. Goss, Fractures of the glenoid cavity [J], J Bone Joint Surg(Am) 74 (2) (1992) 299–305.
[11] F.F. Adam, Surgical treatment of displaced fractures of the glenoid cavity [J], Int. Orthop. 26 (3) (2002) 150–153.
[12] P. Schandelmaier, Fractures of the glenoid treated by operation: a 5- to 23-year follow-up of 22 cases [J], J Bone Joint Surg(Br) 84 (2) (2002) 173.
[13] G.D. Gramstad, G. Marra, Treatment of glenoid fractures [J], Tech. Should. Elbow Surg. 3 (2) (2002) 102.
[14] Rongguang Ao, Bbaoqing Yu, Jifei Shi, et al., Acromial approach for treating glenoid fractures: a report of two cases and a literature review, Exp Ther Med 10
[15] M. Erich, M.D. Gauger, A. Peter, et al., Surgical technique: a minimally invasive approach to scapula neck and body fractures [J], Clin Orthop 469 (12) (2001)
[16] H. Qin, C.Z. Hu, X.L. Zhang, L.X. Shen, Z.C. Xue, Z.Q. An, Surgical treatment of Ideberg type III glenoid fractures with associated superior shoulder suspensory
[17] J. Bartoníek, M. Tuek, O. Naňka, Scapular fractures [J], Rozhl. Chir. 94 (10) (2015) 393–404.
[18] A.W. ElMaraghy, M.W. Devereaux, K. Ravichandiran, et al., Subacromial morphometric assessment of the clavicle hook plate [J], Injury 41 (2) (2010) 613–619.

(2015) 1653–1656.
3390–3399.
complex injury, Orthopedics 36 (2013) e1244–e 1250.

8

